The Thiele Machine
A Complete Account from First Principles:
Structural Entitlement, Accountable Computation, and No Free Insight
Devon Thiele
April 2026
Abstract
I started building this in January 2025. I had no CS degree. I was trying to
make a 3D renderer. What I ended up with, fifteen months later, is a new model
of computation with machine-checked proofs, a hardware implementation, and
a result I did not expect: the machine’s internal honesty condition for a 2-player
game turns out to be exactly equivalent to a polynomial constraint system from
quantum information theory — specifically, positive semidefiniteness of the NPA
moment matrix for zero-marginal CHSH correlations. No physics assumed. Pure
algebra.
The central idea is simple. A Turing machine tracks registers, memory, and
time. It cannot see whether a computation has become entitled to use a structural
shortcut — a decomposition, a verified invariant, a certified fact about its own
state. The Thiele Machine makes that entitlement first-class and cost-bearing.
There is a global counter called µ that starts at zero and never goes down. Any
computation that ends in a certified structural claim must have paid at least 1
into µ. That is No Free Insight. It is a conservation law, proved in Coq from the
machine’s own step function.
46 opcodes. All in hardware. All with formal correctness proofs — 36 unconditional and 10 carrying Qed bisimulation proofs under structural invariants
(coupling_wf, morph_table_wf) that hold inductively from hardware reset,
zero structural gaps. A conservation law. A unique canonical cost measure. A complexity hierarchy. A biconditional between the machine’s honesty condition and
the zero-marginal NPA polynomial realizability condition. Every proof compiles
or it doesn’t. That is the point.

Contents
1

Let me be straight with you

2 The Turing Machine: what it can do and what it cannot see
2.1 What a Turing machine is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 The blind spot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Classical complexity ignores structural cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2
3
3
4
5

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

3 What structure is
3.1 Partitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Axioms on modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Structural gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5
5
6
7

4

Structural entitlement
4.1 The precise vocabulary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 What narrowing buys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 The boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7
7
12
12

5 What insight is, and why it cannot be free
5.1 The three tiers of observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Why insight cannot be free . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13
13
14

6 The µ ledger
6.1 What mu is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Why mu is the unique canonical cost measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 The LASSERT cost formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15
15
17
17

7

18
18
19
19

No Free Insight: the first conservation law
7.1 The abstract versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 The specific versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3 What this means in practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8 The formal machine state

20

9 The instruction set: all 46 opcodes
9.1 Group 1: Partition operations (4 opcodes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.2 Group 2: Logic and certification (3 opcodes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.3 Group 3: Compute and data transfer (14 opcodes) . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.4 Group 4: Memory and control flow (8 opcodes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.5 Group 5: Revelation, I/O, heap, and tensor (7 opcodes) . . . . . . . . .
9.6 Group 6: Witness and certification (3 opcodes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.7 Group 7: Categorical morphism operations (7 opcodes) . . . . . . . . .
9.8 Why 46 opcodes? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22
22
23
25
25
26
27
28
30

10 What a categorical morphism is: the category theory, from scratch
10.1 The idea of a category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.2 Why modules as objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.3 Why this is not just “extra state” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30
30
31
32

11 Categorical separation: the machine is strictly richer

32

12 The knowledge receipt: what makes certification unforgeable

33

13 How the machine is built: three layers

35

2

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

13.1 Layer 1: The Coq kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13.2 Layer 2: The OCaml extracted runner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13.3 Layer 3: The Kami RTL hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35
35
36

14 Algebraic Robustness: Binary Game Statistics and the µ-Ledger
14.1 The Bell test setup, from scratch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14.2 The CHSH inequality: where it comes from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
√
14.3 The quantum bound: why 2 2? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14.4 What the cost algebra proves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14.5 The bit-commitment requirement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14.6 Algebraic characterization of the µ-ledger honesty condition . . . . . .
14.6.1 The matrix, written out . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14.6.2 Where the three conditions come from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38
38
39
40
42
43
43
43
44

15 Irreversibility Accounting and the µ-Hierarchy
15.1 Historical motivation: Landauer’s irreversibility argument . . . . . . .
15.2 What the Thiele Machine proves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15.3 The µ-hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

47
47
47
48

16 Discrete Geometry over Partition Graphs
16.1 Discrete triangulation of the partition graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16.2 The discrete Gauss-Bonnet theorem (unconditional) . . . . . . . . . . .

49
49
49

17 What Coq is, and why I used it
17.1 The Inquisitor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

50
50

18 Zero Admitted: what it actually means

51

19 How to break this

52

20 The full claim ledger

53

21 What I don’t know

57

22 Conclusion

58

3

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

1 Let me be straight with you
No CS degree. No math degree. No physics degree. I barely knew what programming
was. And I was not trying to build a formally verified CPU.
I was trying to build a 3D renderer.
I had read about category theory and thought it was the right mathematical structure
for a rendering pipeline that could not be wrong. Objects, morphisms, a rendering
functor. Get triangles on screen using math that enforced correctness by design. I built
it. At 2 AM on January 22, the morphisms were being applied correctly. That was
supposed to be the end of the project.
Sixteen days in, I realized the categorical framework I had built for rendering also
ran physics simulations without any changes. I plugged Newton’s laws into the
same category structure and it ran. I did not plan that. I discovered it. I went from
debugging why a pixel was not appearing to realizing I had built something that
described physics too.
What survived from there to here is not the code. By the time the Coq proofs landed
every line of the original renderer had been thrown out at least twice. What survived
is the architectural commitment: category theory as the state itself, not as a metaphor
for the state. The Category class I wrote at 2 AM on January 22 to make a triangle
render is, in different words, what vm_graph is in the machine this thesis describes.
The morphisms in that early code were objects with provenance; the morphisms in
this machine are objects with provenance you can challenge with MORPH_ASSERT.
The receipt grew teeth. The shape held.
I followed that question for fifteen months. Rendering became physics became formal
computation became Coq proofs became hardware. Every step revealed another layer
I did not know existed. I did not know what a Turing machine was when I started. I
did not know what Coq was. I learned each thing by needing it for the next step.
I used large language models as implementation tools throughout. The tool was
useless for most of the early work because nothing like this existed: no reference
implementation, no prior work to hand it, no Stack Overflow answer. I had to build all
the context from scratch before the tool became useful, and that took months. Once
the context was there, it became a force multiplier. The ideas, the architecture, the
math, the direction: mine. The proofs compile or they don’t, and I checked every one
of them.
I’m telling you this because it matters for how I think. I don’t come from a background
where anyone told me “this is how it works, trust us.” I don’t have professors or
colleagues whose authority I can lean on. When I encounter a claim, I either find the
proof or I don’t believe it. That’s not a methodology I adopted. It’s how I think. It’s
the only way I know.

4

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Everything in here gets built from scratch. Not as a courtesy. Because I don’t believe
I understand something until I’ve built it, and I built this document the same way I
built the machine.
If you are an expert and you find this review of basics annoying, skip to Section 8. The
technical content starts there. But if you find anything in the basics wrong, I want to
know. Nothing here is correct just because I wrote it.
What this project is. The Thiele Machine is a model of computation where structural
entitlement is a first-class state component. By entitlement I mean the machine is not
merely storing data; it is allowed, by its own checked trace, to use a decomposition,
relation, invariant, certificate, or narrowed feasible set as part of the computation.
No Free Insight is the first theorem that falls out: a computation cannot end in a
stronger certified claim than it started with unless the strengthening passed through
the machine’s explicit cost ledger. This is formalized in Coq and machine-checked.
The ledger is called µ. It never goes down. If you go from uncertified to certified, µ
went up. Scope: raw µ is a receipt that certification work was paid for. It is not, by
itself, a universal depth score for the meaning of the claim. The stronger semantic
reading only applies when the certification comes with an explicit narrowing witness.
That distinction is not cosmetic. It is the hinge between an honest cost ledger and an
overclaim.
What this project is not. It is not a claim that I solved P vs NP. It is not a theory of
everything. It is not a claim that computation is physics or that physics is computation.
The CHSH algebraic result is pure math. The Landauer connection is motivation. That
is the full extent of the physics content here.

2 The Turing Machine: what it can do and what it cannot see
The Turing machine. What it is, exactly, and where it falls short. Not vaguely falls
short. Precisely.
2.1 What a Turing machine is
Alan Turing described his machine in 1936 to make precise the intuitive notion of
“algorithm.” The machine is this:
• An infinite tape. Think of it as an infinitely long strip of paper, divided into cells.
Each cell holds one symbol from a finite alphabet, say {0, 1, blank}.
• A read/write head. It sits on one cell at a time. It can read the symbol in that cell,
write a new symbol over it, and move one step left or one step right.
• A finite set of states. Call them Q = {q0 , q1 , . . . , qn }. The machine is always in
exactly one state. q0 is the start state. Some states are designated “halting” states.
• A transition table. For each combination of (current state, symbol under the
head), the table says: write this symbol, move this direction, go to this new state.
5

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

That is the entire machine. Nothing else.
Here is the remarkable thing: this simple machine can compute anything that can be
computed by following a definite procedure. Every algorithm that has ever been written, in
every programming language that has ever existed, can be translated into a Turing
machine. This is the Church-Turing thesis. The original claim (Church 1936, Turing
1936) is specifically about effective calculability: anything that can be computed by
following a mechanical, finite, step-by-step procedure, a Turing machine can also
compute. The thesis has never been falsified within mathematics and computation
theory.
The claim about physical hardware is a related but separate conjecture, sometimes
called the physical Church-Turing thesis: that every physical computing device is computationally equivalent to a Turing machine. This is an empirical claim about physics,
not proven mathematics. So far, every physical computing device built turns out to be
equivalent to a Turing machine in what it can compute. Your laptop, your phone, every
server in every data center: all of them are, in the relevant theoretical sense, Turing
machines. They can compute exactly the same class of things. The only confirmed
difference is speed.
2.2 The blind spot
Here is the precise limitation. The transition table sees exactly two things: the current
state q and the symbol under the head. That’s it.
The machine cannot ask: “Is this tape sorted?” It has to read every cell.
The machine cannot ask: “Does this graph have two disconnected components?” It
has to run a traversal.
The machine cannot ask: “Are these two parts of the input independent of each other?”
It has to check.
The Turing machine’s view of its tape is LOCAL. One cell at a time. It has no primitive
way to see global structure. It can COMPUTE global structure, but computing it and
seeing it are different things. To compute that a list is sorted, the machine has to
execute a sorting-detection algorithm that touches every element. It pays in time and
space for every structural fact it learns.
I spent months staring at this before it clicked. The Turing Machine isn’t broken. It’s
blind by design. It’s like trying to find your way through a maze by only ever looking
at the floor tile you’re standing on. You might do it — if the maze has an exit and if
your search strategy eventually reaches it. Some mazes have no exit, and some search
strategies loop forever. That is the halting problem: the machine cannot in general tell
from the floor tile whether it is making progress or going in circles. But if the maze
does terminate, you are paying for every wrong turn and every part already explored.
Someone with a map doesn’t pay that cost.
6

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

The Thiele Machine does not magically give the map. “The map” here is a concrete
thing: a certified partition graph with proven structural properties: a checked decomposition into modules, a validated formula, an asserted morphism with provenance.
The Thiele Machine represents the specific moment a computation becomes entitled to
use one of these, and it makes that entitlement auditable: there is always a µ-ledger
entry showing when the certification was paid for. The map is not free.
2.3 Classical complexity ignores structural cost
Standard complexity theory measures two things: time (number of steps) and space
(number of cells or registers used). It says nothing about the cost of knowing that the
input has structure.
Consider the satisfiability problem (SAT): given a logical formula ϕ over n boolean
variables, is there an assignment that makes it true? In the worst case, a blind machine
has to check all 2n assignments. That’s what makes SAT hard.
Now suppose ϕ decomposes cleanly: ϕ = ϕ1 ∧ ϕ2 , where ϕ1 and ϕ2 share no variables.
You can solve ϕ1 on its own (2n1 work) and ϕ2 on its own (2n2 work). Total work:
2n1 + 2n2 instead of 2n . That is an exponential improvement.
But that improvement only applies if you know the decomposition exists. And the
Turing machine model assigns zero cost to knowing it. The structure is either there or
it isn’t, and you either see it or you spend time finding it, but the act of certifying “I
know this decomposition is valid” is not tracked, not paid for, not audited.
The Thiele Machine says: that act belongs inside the computation. Here is the structural
object. Here is the checked transition that makes the object admissible. Here is where
the cost shows up in the trace. Here is how to verify that the cost was actually paid.
This is the structural-entitlement reading of No Free Insight.

3 What structure is
“Structure” is one of those words everyone uses and nobody defines. The whole
machine rests on what it means, so here is the definition.
3.1 Partitions
Start with the simplest case. Take any set S and divide it into labeled buckets that
don’t overlap and cover everything. That is a partition.
Formally: a partition of S is a collection of disjoint non-empty subsets S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk
such that S1 ∪ S2 ∪ · · · ∪ Sk = S. Each Si is called a module or block or cell, depending
on the context.
Now here is the key thing: the partition IS information. Knowing that element x
belongs to block S1 and element y belongs to block S2 tells you something real. It tells
you x and y are in different groups. If you didn’t know the partition, you didn’t know

7

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

that. If you know the partition, you can look it up in constant time.
In a computational context, partitioning the memory or register state means saying:
“These addresses belong to module A, those addresses belong to module B, and these
two modules are independent.” That is structural knowledge. A Turing machine has
no way to represent this directly. It has to recompute independence from scratch every
time it needs to know it. The Thiele Machine stores the partition as part of its state,
audits the cost of building it, and enforces that building it was paid for.
3.2 Axioms on modules
A partition alone is just a labeling. What makes it structural knowledge is when you
attach constraints to the modules.
First, two definitions I need.
A predicate is a statement about a thing that is either true or false. “x > 5” is a predicate
about a number x. “This memory region contains a sorted list” is a predicate about a
memory region. Predicates are the basic unit of making a claim about something.
A logical formula over boolean variables is an expression built from variables (each
either true or false) connected by AND (∧), OR (∨), and NOT (¬). Example: ( x1 ∨
x2 ) ∧ (¬ x1 ∨ x3 ) — this formula is true when either x1 or x2 is true AND when either x1
is false or x3 is true. A satisfying assignment is a specific choice of true/false for each
variable that makes the whole formula evaluate to true. An unsatisfying assignment
makes it false.
With those in hand: you attach constraints to the modules. For example: “Module
A’s memory region satisfies the predicate Φ A ,” where Φ A might say “this region is a
valid binary heap” or “all values in this region are between 0 and 100” or “this region
encodes a satisfying assignment to the formula stored in module B.”
These constraints are called axioms. They are written in a formal logic.
I’ll come back to the exact encoding in the ISA section, but the rough picture is: the
machine reads a formula from memory, checks it against a certificate (a witness that
the formula is satisfiable — but also a witness that it’s not a tautology), and either
accepts or traps. The piece of hardware that does that checking is called the Logic
Engine. It’s a finite-state machine built into the chip — a small dedicated unit that
walks through the formula word by word and verifies the witnesses without calling
out to any external solver. If validation succeeds, the checked constraint package can
be used by the later certification path. If validation fails, the machine traps and sets an
error flag. The cost is charged either way.
The crucial point: you cannot add an axiom to a module for free. Adding an axiom
means the machine paid to certify it. The axiom is evidence, not assertion.

8

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

3.3 Structural gain
A trace has “structural gain” if it starts in a state where some structural fact is not
certified and ends in a state where it is. The classic example: a trace that starts with
an uncertified partition and ends with a certified satisfying-assignment witness has
undergone structural gain.
The Thiele Machine’s core question is: where, in the trace, did the structural gain
enter? Not merely “did the gain happen.” That is visible from inspecting the start and
end states. The question is which instruction, at which step, introduced the certified
structural knowledge.
The answer is always: an instruction that costs µ ≥ 1. That is No Free Insight.

4 Structural entitlement
The center of the project is not just “certification has a price.” That is true, but it is the
first conservation law, not the whole picture.
The deeper object is structural entitlement. A computation has structural entitlement
when the state does not merely contain data, but contains an admissible structural
fact that later steps are allowed to use: a partition, a decomposition, a morphism,
a constraint, a witness, or a narrowed feasible set. The difference matters. A raw
bit pattern can be copied. A certified decomposition can justify solving two smaller
problems instead of one large one. A raw morphism ID can be forged in a register. An
asserted morphism in the graph has provenance — meaning you can trace it back to
the specific MORPH and COMPOSE instructions that built it; the machine’s execution
history is the chain of evidence. A formula in memory is text. A checked formula with
a satisfying assignment and a falsifying assignment is admissible narrowing: it proves
the constraint is real, not a tautology, and rules out at least one state.
Definition 4.1 (Structural entitlement). A state has structural entitlement to a claim P
when three things are present:
• a structural object in the machine state, such as a partition, morphism, witness
counter, or formula package;
• a checked relation between that object and the claim P;
• a trace-visible certification or assertion event that makes later use of P admissible.
Without the third part, the object may exist as raw data, but the computation has not
earned the right to use it as certified structure.
The pieces connect as follows.
4.1 The precise vocabulary
Every term below is an exact Coq definition, not a metaphor. Every theorem that
follows has been machine-verified. I’m not stamping each one individually with
9

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

“machine-checked” — assume all of them are.
Feasible set. A feasible set Ω is a concrete, finite list of Thiele Machine states. In
the Coq code, the type is literally list VMState. The interpretation: Ω is the set of
machine states the computation might be in, given everything that has been checked
and certified so far. Before any structural knowledge is certified, Ω can contain many
states. After certifying a constraint, Ω shrinks to only the states consistent with that
constraint. A feasible set is not an abstract notion of “possible worlds.” It is a list of
actual machine states.
Prior and posterior. The prior Ω is the feasible set before an observation or structural
certification event. The posterior Ω′ is the feasible set after. The posterior is always
a subset of the prior: Ω′ ⊆ Ω. If the posterior is a strict subset (|Ω′ | < |Ω|), some
states have been ruled out. The observation eliminated them. The picture is: you start
with a universe of possibilities. You run an experiment. You learn which outcomes
are consistent with the result. The states that are no longer consistent get thrown out.
What remains is the posterior. Here, “learning something” means the machine certified
a structural claim that is false in those eliminated states, so they can no longer be the
actual machine state.
Distinguishing observation. A distinguishing observation is a function that returns
different values on the eliminated states (in Ω but not in Ω′ ) versus the remaining
states (in Ω′ ). Formally: there exists at least one eliminated state sw ∈ Ω \ Ω′ such
that the observation function outputs a value on sw that no state in Ω′ produces. The
observation is the “test” that reveals the structure. If you cannot name such a function,
you cannot show that the posterior genuinely excludes something the prior allowed.
Strictly stronger predicate. A predicate P1 is strictly stronger than P2 if P1 accepts a
strict subset of what P2 accepts. Formally in Coq: P1 ≤ P2 (whenever P1 is true, P2 is
true too) AND there exists an observation where P1 is false but P2 is true. The word
“stronger” means more restrictive: P1 makes a harder claim, rules out more states as
invalid. If P2 is “the state is in Ω” and P1 is “the state is in Ω′ ⊊ Ω”, then P1 is strictly
stronger — it demands more, and anything that satisfies P1 also satisfies P2 but not
vice versa. This is the opposite of everyday use of “stronger”: a stronger claim in this
logical sense is harder to satisfy, not more impressive-sounding.
Structure-addition event.
A structure-addition event is a single execution step where the assertion register csr_cert_addr transitions from 0 to
nonzero. Precisely: s.vm_csrs.csr_cert_addr = 0 before the step and
(vm_apply s i ).vm_csrs.csr_cert_addr ̸= 0 after. This only happens via a successful MORPH_ASSERT with a non-empty property string, which stores the ASCII
checksum of that property in csr_cert_addr. Not “structural knowledge was acquired” in some vague sense. Precisely: this specific field flipped from zero, at this step,
by MORPH_ASSERT asserting a non-empty property against an existing morphism.
10

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Supra-certification (has_supra_cert). The machine has reached supra-certification
when csr_cert_addr ̸= 0. The name distinguishes it from vm_certified
(the top-level flag set by the CERTIFY opcode). Supra-certification specifically
tracks the MORPH_ASSERT channel: has a morphism property been asserted and
its checksum registered? A machine can have vm_certified = true without
has_supra_cert (if it used only CERTIFY and not MORPH_ASSERT, since CERTIFY
never touches csr_cert_addr). Both are positive-cost certification channels; they
record different things.
Decision tree. A decision tree is an explicit witness to how the trace’s observations
branch over the state space. At each node, the tree records: here is an observation,
these states passed it, these states failed it. The leaves record which states ended up in
the posterior. The tree is a proof object, not a runtime structure: it exists to demonstrate
that the transition from prior to posterior was the result of a definite sequence of
binary tests rather than a magic jump. The Coq requires you to construct it explicitly
as a witness; you cannot claim a shortcut is sound without handing over the actual
branching structure that produced the posterior.
Posterior-representative reduction. Given a prior state s ∈ Ω, a posteriorrepresentative reduction provides a function mapping s to a representative s′ ∈ Ω′ .
This proves that every prior state corresponds to something in the posterior. The
purpose: it shows the posterior was not reached by arbitrarily discarding states, but
by a coherent mapping where each prior state is “accounted for” by a posterior representative. Without this, the narrowing could in principle be fake: you could claim the
posterior is small by just deleting states without any principled connection to the prior.
Theorem 4.1 (Classical blindness as quotient). The four-field forgetful map from Thiele
states to Turing-style snapshots is a many-to-one quotient. Its kernel is exactly equality on PC,
µ, registers, and memory, so it can identify states that differ in certification, witness counters,
or graph structure. The six-field shadow_proj keeps vm_certified but still forgets
morphism structure; no function of that shadow alone can separate the morphism witness
states.
If your machine state only records registers, memory, PC, error bit, and maybe µ, you
have already thrown away part of what matters. You have collapsed states that differ
on the inside into a single raw state that looks the same from the outside. That is not a
philosophical complaint. It is a theorem about a projection map.
Theorem 4.2 (µ-ledger necessity, complete independence classification). I write
X ⊥ Y to mean: knowing Y tells you nothing about X. There exist two reachable machine states with identical Y-values but different X-values. Not just from one starting
point. From every starting point the machine can reach. Five such independence results
hold simultaneously: (1) µ ⊥ (mem, regs, pc); (2) certified ⊥ (mem, regs, pc);
(3) certified ⊥ (mem, regs, pc, µ); (4) µ ⊥ (mem, regs, pc, certified);
(5) vm_graph ⊥ (mem, regs, pc, µ, certified). The three non-classical components—

11

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

µ, vm_certified, vm_graph—are each irrecoverable from any combination of the others
plus classical state. The projection (mem, regs, pc, µ, certified) is the minimal complete
extension for ledger semantics: dropping either µ or vm_certified loses the ability to
determine the other. The separation holds starting from every reachable machine state, and no
program prefix of any length collapses it.
The ledger is not just a counter someone forgot to derive. There are explicit witness
states with identical Turing/RAM-visible state and incompatible receipts—not just
from one starting point, but from every state the machine can reach. Cost, certification,
and graph structure are three independent bookkeeping dimensions. A model that
drops any of them cannot determine the full structural semantics internally.
Theorem 4.3 (Latent µ: the cost is intrinsic to computation). The total µ accumulated by
running any instruction sequence equals the sum of instruction costs, independent of every
aspect of machine state (vm_graph, vm_regs, vm_mem, vm_pc, vm_certified, starting µ).
Formally:
µfinal = µinitial + ∑i∈prog instruction_cost(i )
The right side is the sum of costs over every instruction in the program. It does not depend
on the starting state at all. Two machines running the same program from any two starting
states accumulate the same additional µ — the delta depends only on the program, not the
starting state. Any instruction-consistent accounting system that assigns zero to the starting
state assigns exactly trace_total_cost to the result — there is no alternative honest
accounting. Any program containing a positive-cost instruction accumulates strictly positive
µ — there is no free computation.
The µ-cost is not a feature of the Thiele Machine. It is a property of the instruction
sequence itself. Replace the Thiele Machine’s µ-counter with any other honest accounting and you get the same number. A Turing machine running the same program paid
exactly this cost on every execution—it simply had no register to store the receipt. The
ledger does not create the cost. It reveals what was always there.
Theorem 4.4 (Feasible narrowing becomes predicate strengthening). If a posterior
feasible set Ω′ is a strict subset of a prior feasible set Ω, and there is an observation that
distinguishes a removed witness state from all posterior states, then the membership predicate
for Ω′ is strictly stronger than the membership predicate for Ω.
This is the bridge from “the search space got smaller” to “the computation now
accepts a stronger claim.” The predicates are not fake constants. They are built from
membership in the feasible sets through an observation function.
Theorem 4.5 (Strengthening requires structure addition). If a trace starts with no certification address, ends certified for a strictly stronger predicate, and the certification is tied to the
machine’s supra-certification channel, then the run contains a structure-addition event.
This is the formal answer to “where did the new admissible structure enter?” It did
not appear from arithmetic alone. It entered through a trace-visible structure-addition
event.
12

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Theorem 4.6 (Universal certification cost). For any abstract certification system with a state
type, instruction type, step function, cost function, and certification predicate, if every singlestep transition from uncertified to certified costs at least 1, then every trace from uncertified to
certified has total cost at least 1.
This last theorem is important because it is not about the Thiele ISA. It says the conservation law is forced for any system once the system admits a real certification predicate
and a sound cost rule for certification transitions. If a model lets the certification
predicate flip at zero cost, then it has free certification by construction. If it refuses to
represent certification at all, then it cannot talk about structural entitlement internally.
It can only smuggle that entitlement in from outside the model.
Theorem 4.7 (Structural entitlement representation). For any explicit witness of structural
entitlement consisting of:
• a strict feasible-set narrowing Ω′ ⊊ Ω;
• an observation function that distinguishes at least one eliminated witness state from all
posterior states;
• a certified posterior predicate built from membership in Ω′ ;
• a decision tree realized by the trace: meaning the trace’s actual sequence of observations
matches the tree’s branching structure — each branch in the tree corresponds to a test
the execution actually performed; and
• a posterior-representative reduction tying the prior states to posterior representatives,
the posterior predicate is strictly stronger than the prior predicate, the trace contains a structureaddition event, and the quantitative narrowing is bounded by the paid ledger:
log2↑ |Ω| − log2↑ |Ω′ | ≤ ∆µ.
(log2↑ is the ceiling of the base-2 logarithm: the smallest integer ≥ log2 of the argument. It
counts how many binary questions you need to locate a state in the set. The ceiling rounding is
conservative: it can only make the bound harder to satisfy, never easier.)
This theorem does not quantify over the English word “structure.” It defines the witness class: strict narrowing, distinguishability, certification, and an explicit tree/fiber
representative for the reduction. For every member of that class, structural entitlement
is not metadata and not a slogan. It is predicate strengthening, it requires structure
addition, and its quantified narrowing is charged to µ.
Theorem
4.8
(Every
sound
structural
shortcut
lands
here). A
SoundStructuralShortcut is a package containing exactly the receipts a shortcut must provide to count as sound: a prior feasible set, a posterior feasible set, strict narrowing,
a distinguishing observation, a certified posterior predicate, a realized decision tree, and
a posterior-representative reduction. For every such package, the structural-entitlement
representation theorem applies. The shortcut lands in strictly stronger posterior knowledge, a
13

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

structure-addition event, and the ∆µ lower bound.
This is the formal version of “it has to.” Once a shortcut is no longer just a human
story but a sound object the machine may use, it has to provide the data that makes the
shortcut admissible. In this framework, that data is exactly the structural-entitlement
witness. If someone says symmetry, factorization, modularity, independence, or
decomposition gave them the shortcut, the next question is no longer mystical. Show
me the prior set, the posterior set, the observation that rules something out, and the
representative/tree witness. If they can show that, the theorem applies. If they cannot,
then the structure is still outside the computation.
4.2 What narrowing buys
The machine also has a concrete structural-advantage demonstration.
StructuralAdvantage.v studies a factored search problem. The blind program has all instruction costs set to 0 and searches the flat space. The sighted program
pays two receipt-visible events, each EMIT "." 0, for total cost 18, and searches two
factors separately. The file proves the exact cost formulas and the arithmetic fact that
the N 2 versus 2N gap eventually dwarfs the constant µ cost. The executable tests
check the measured VM behavior on representative sizes.
There are two nearby claims here and it matters to keep them separate. The original
EMIT-only N = 1 witness closes the observation layer: it proves posterior admissibility
as CertifiedObs (a Coq type for “a certified observation has been recorded,” meaning the machine has observed and recorded a result but has not yet activated a cert channel). It does not close the stronger bridge. The run does not end in has_supra_cert,
and in the semantic CSR-transition sense it does not realize structure addition. A
minimally extended witness does close the full theorem honestly: keep the factorized
search exactly as it is, then append PNEW, MORPH_ID, and MORPH_ASSERT. That suffix
is enough to fire the concrete certification channel, so the extended trace lands in the
full structure-addition theorem.
That example is not a P vs NP result. It is a small, honest witness for the thing
this machine is meant to track: certified structure can change which computation is
admissible, and the cost of acquiring that admissibility is not the same as the time
saved by using it.
4.3 The boundary
What I still do not have is the open translation theorem: whether every human informal
story about symmetry, modularity, factorization, independence, or decomposition
can always be packaged as a SoundStructuralShortcut. That would be a full
informal-to-formal representation theorem for structural use, and it is stronger than
what’s proved here. It also sets the standard for the work: if a claimed shortcut can be
pushed down into explicit witnesses, it has to be pushed to bedrock. If it can still be
pushed, push again. Stop only where the proof honestly stops.

14

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

I’ve proved the hard internal theorem for the explicit class, and proved the boundary
in both directions on a nearby concrete witness. The original EMIT-only factorizedsearch trace closes only the observation layer: the posterior predicate is certified
observationally, but the run does not reach has_supra_cert and does not realize
semantic structure addition. A minimally extended trace, with the factorized search
unchanged and only a post-search suffix PNEW ; MORPH_ID ; MORPH_ASSERT,
does close the whole chain: stronger predicate, structure addition, and the ∆µ lower
bound. The unconditional Shannon-style statement for every deterministic single
trace is still explicitly rejected in the code. The bridge needs a whole-tree, per-branchpreimage, or distributional witness — something that accounts for the full structure of
how the search splits, not just a single execution path. That is not a weakness in the
proof. It is where the proof stopped lying.
So the honest thesis is this: once structural entitlement is internalized with explicit
witnesses, free certified strengthening is impossible; classical shadows lose entitlementrelevant distinctions; and feasible-set narrowing has a formal path into predicate
strengthening and a ledger lower bound. The broader project is to show how many
real structural shortcuts can be compiled into those witnesses.

5 What insight is, and why it cannot be free
In this machine, insight has a precise meaning. Three kinds of observation:
5.1 The three tiers of observation
Not all observations are the same.
WitnessInsightGeneral.v.

The taxonomy is proven in Coq.

File:

Tier 0: Raw observation (always free). A raw observation records data without
committing to any structural interpretation. The clearest example in the Thiele Machine
is a CHSH trial (see Section 14): you run an experiment, you record the outcome in a
counter, and nothing structural changes. The counter goes up. The cert channel is not
touched. This is free. Cost: 0.
Tier 1: Certified structural insight (always costs ≥ 1). The machine has two
recorded certification channels. One is the formula/certificate address channel,
csr_cert_addr. The other is the top-level flag, vm_certified. Any instruction
that turns either channel from “off” to “on” must have cost ≥ 1. This is proven in
Coq (certification_requires_positive_mu). One thing to be precise about:
in the current hardware-aligned step relation, LASSERT checks a constraint package
and charges for it, but LASSERT itself does not directly mutate the cert channels. The
concrete state-changing instructions are CERTIFY (sets vm_certified = true) and
MORPH_ASSERT (sets csr_cert_addr nonzero). LASSERT performs the validation
that might precede MORPH_ASSERT or CERTIFY. AbstractNoFI.v reasons about
the broader certification/revelation class — which includes LASSERT, EMIT, REVEAL,

15

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

LJOIN, READ_PORT, CERTIFY, and MORPH_ASSERT — as a positive-cost policy: all
of them cost ≥ 1. The distinction matters: LASSERT checking a formula is part of the
work chain, even if the formal cert-channel flip happens via the subsequent CERTIFY
or MORPH_ASSERT.
Tier 2: Certified binary-game witness insight (always costs ≥ 1). The sharpest case: a
machine that is certified AND whose CHSH statistics show a violation of the classical
bound (S > 2; more on CHSH in Section 14). Getting certified is already a Tier 1 event
(cost ≥ 1). Getting the statistics to show a violation means the data can’t be explained
by any shared random strategy; this is proven in CHSHStatisticalBridge.v. Together: certified game-violation evidence costs at least 1 to acquire, over any trace of
any length.
5.2 Why insight cannot be free
The proof:
Suppose a machine starts uncertified and ends certified. Somewhere in that trace, a
specific opcode fired that flipped one of the certification registers from off to on. The
two concrete cert-channel instructions are: CERTIFY (which sets vm_certified =
true) and MORPH_ASSERT when the morphism exists (which sets csr_cert_addr
to the ASCII checksum of the property string — nonzero for any non-empty property
string). These are the only instructions that change those fields. MORPH_ASSERT with
an empty property string or a missing morphism does not activate the cert channel,
though it still costs S(δ) ≥ 1. This is proven by case analysis over all 46 opcodes —
every other instruction leaves those fields unchanged. So: the cert flip happened at a
CERTIFY or MORPH_ASSERT step. Look at that exact step. That step, by the semantics
of the machine, has cost S(δ) ≥ 1, because both CERTIFY and MORPH_ASSERT are
in the mandatory-floor class. So at that step: µafter = µbefore + S(δ) ≥ µbefore + 1. And
because µ never decreases (each instruction adds a non-negative cost), µbefore ≥ µinitial .
Therefore µfinal ≥ µafter ≥ µbefore + 1 ≥ µinitial + 1.
This is not a philosophical argument. It is a structural property of the step function.
The Coq proof checks it mechanically. The proof does not say “intuitively, certification
should cost something.” It says: here is the step function definition, here is the cost
semantics, here is the monotonicity lemma, here is the induction on the trace. QED.
The deeper reason is this: if you could certify structure for free, the certification would
be meaningless. A receipt that any machine can produce at zero cost proves nothing.
The whole point of the µ ledger is that it is unforgeable. You cannot accumulate
certified structural knowledge without a trace of cost.
But cost alone is not yet semantic depth. A machine can spend resources checking a
claim that turns out to be shallow. So in the tightened architecture, LASSERT does not
count as structural certification merely because a formula parses and one satisfying
assignment exists. It must also carry a non-triviality witness: one satisfying assignment

16

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

and one falsifying assignment. That proves the asserted constraint excludes at least
one state and therefore genuinely narrows the feasible set. The receipt proves spend;
the witness proves the spend bought an actual narrowing.

6 The µ ledger
µ (mu) is the global structural cost ledger of the Thiele Machine.
6.1 What mu is
µ is a natural number attached to every machine state. It starts at 0. It never decreases.
Every instruction carries a cost parameter (δ) in its encoding. The machine adds that
cost to µ when the instruction executes. Here is how δ is used in practice:
For pure compute programs, meaning programs that do arithmetic, load and store
values, and jump, every instruction carries δ = 0. The program I use as the
concrete comparison case for the Turing Strictness theorem (blind_program in
StructuralAdvantage.v) has this property: all instructions at δ = 0, and the
proof that its total µ-cost is zero is a direct calculation. For these programs, µ stays at 0
unless a positive-cost instruction fires.
For certification and revelation instructions (CERTIFY, LASSERT, MORPH_ASSERT,
EMIT, REVEAL, LJOIN, READ_PORT): the cost is at least 1, regardless of δ. Even δ = 0
still costs 1. Here is why that floor is forced, not chosen.
When CERTIFY fires, it commits the machine to a certified state: vm_certified
flips from false to true. That commitment is irreversible — µ never goes down, and
the certificate cannot be taken back. Committing to a structural fact is informationtheoretically equivalent to erasing the “uncertified” possibility from your state space.
By Landauer’s argument from the previous section, erasing information has a minimum cost. The minimum honest cost of an irreversible certification step, as a function
only of the programmer-supplied δ, is δ + 1: the δ the programmer declares plus the
mandatory 1 for the irreversible commit. That is S(δ).
Why +1 and not +2 or +0.5? Because +1 is the minimum that makes certification
impossible for free. δ + 0 would allow δ = 0 to certify for free. δ + 2 would be overcharging. δ + 1 is the unique honest minimum: you can always choose δ = 0 and pay
exactly 1; you can choose δ > 0 and pay more. The proof that S(δ) is the only consistent
cost floor is in MuCostDerivation.v (cost_necessity + cost_uniqueness).
Throughout this document, S(n) means n + 1 (Peano successor). S(δ) = δ + 1 ≥ 1
always. EMIT, REVEAL, and READ_PORT go further: their cost also grows with the
information content they carry. An EMIT of one ASCII character (= 8 bits) with δ = 0
costs 8 + 1 = 9. Ten characters costs 80 + 1 = 81. You cannot emit more for the same
price as less.
For everything outside that positive-cost class, including ADD, LOAD, STORE, JUMP,
17

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

PNEW, PSPLIT, PMERGE, MORPH, COMPOSE, and the rest, the machine charges
exactly δ, which can be 0. Here is why these are allowed to be free.
PNEW creates a module. PSPLIT splits one module into two. PMERGE merges
two modules into one. These are reversible: PNEW can be undone by removing the
module; PSPLIT and PMERGE undo each other. Landauer’s principle says reversible
operations carry zero information-erasure cost. So PNEW at δ = 0 is free, not as a
special exemption, but because there is genuinely no information being destroyed.
The same logic applies to MORPH, COMPOSE, and the other graph-building operations. Building the morphism chain is the organizational work. The irreversible cost
happens when you assert the chain via MORPH_ASSERT — that is the moment of
commitment, and that costs S(δ) ≥ 1. You can build for free. You cannot certify for
free.
µ grows whenever instruction_cost is positive. The certification/revelation class
is forced to be positive even when its encoded δ is 0. Other instructions can remain
free by carrying δ = 0.
Here is the complete cost schedule:
Instruction class

Cost = instruction_cost

Ordinary
compute
(ADD,
LOAD, JUMP, PNEW, MORPH,
...)
Certification setters (CERTIFY,
MORPH_ASSERT, LJOIN)
EMIT (emit payload as certified
trace event)
REVEAL (disclose bits from a
module)
READ_PORT (read bits from input port)
LASSERT (certify a logical formula)

δ

(can be 0)

S(δ) = δ + 1

|payload|bits + S(δ)
bits + S(δ)
bits + S(δ)
flen × 8 + S(δ)

The |payload|bits notation means “the number of bits in the payload.” A one-byte
ASCII character contains 8 bits. A ten-byte string contains 80 bits.
For LASSERT: flen is the number of formula units in the encoded formula. Each unit is
one byte (8 bits) in the binary encoding used by the machine. This is a design choice
in the binary format: the formula header declares how many bytes follow, and the
machine charges 8 bits per byte. The multiplication by 8 simply converts byte-count to
bit-count, matching the information content you’re claiming to have certified.

18

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

The proof that µ is always exactly µbefore + instruction_cost for each step:
Theorem 6.1 (µ-Conservation). For any state s and instruction i: (vm_apply s i ).µ =
s.µ + instruction_cost i.
This is not a monotonicity claim. It is an equality. µ goes up by exactly the cost of the
instruction, always, for every instruction, in every case including error cases. There is
no backdoor.
That equality should not be misunderstood. It means the ledger is exact about spend.
It does not, by itself, mean every paid unit corresponds to deep semantic gain. In
this machine, semantic gain is stricter than spend: it requires a narrowing witness in
addition to the ledger entry.
6.2 Why mu is the unique canonical cost measure
Here is the stronger claim, which took me a while to prove: µ is not just A valid cost
measure. It is THE cost measure. Any other cost functional that starts at zero and
is instruction-consistent — meaning it increases by exactly instruction_cost i at
each step — must equal µ on every reachable state. Not “isomorphic to” in some
abstract sense. Literally equal to, value by value, on every state the machine can
actually reach.
Theorem 6.2 (µ-Initiality). Let M be any function on machine states satisfying: (a)
M (init_state) = 0 (zero on the canonical initial state), and (b) M(vm_apply s i ) =
M (s) + instruction_cost i for all reachable states (tracks costs exactly). Then M = µ
on all reachable states. (Note: monotonicity M(s′ ) ≥ M (s) is a consequence of (b), since
instruction_cost returns a natural number which is always ≥ 0. You don’t need to
state it separately.)
In plain language: for this machine with this instruction cost assignment, there is
no alternative accounting. If you define costs the way the machine does — S(δ) for
cert-setters, |payload| + S(δ) for EMIT, and so on — then µ is the only functional that
starts at zero and tracks those costs exactly. What was chosen was the cost assignment
itself: the decision that CERTIFY costs S(δ) and ADD costs δ. The initiality theorem
says that given that assignment, µ is the unique canonical measure. You cannot swap
in a different count that agrees on the cost schedule and gets a different total. That
freedom is closed.
6.3 The LASSERT cost formula
The most important cost formula in the machine is for LASSERT, the opcode that
certifies a logical formula:

∆µLASSERT = flen × 8 + S(mu_delta)
flen is the encoded formula-unit count, read from the formula’s own header in memory.
Each unit contributes eight concrete bits, and the per-step certification charge is always
19

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

at least 1.
The machine reads how many encoded formula units are actually present, charges
eight bits for each unit, and adds at least 1 for the certification step. A longer formula
costs more. A two-unit formula costs at least 16 + 1 = 17. The programmer does not
get to smuggle a larger formula through a smaller bit count.
This is forced, not chosen. You cannot certify a 1000-bit formula by paying for a
10-bit one; the cost counts the formula you actually present. The proof that this
is the unique minimum cost satisfying that constraint is in MuCostDerivation.v
(cost_necessity + cost_uniqueness).
What this buys you: the formula pays for presenting and checking a constraint package.
It does not, by itself, guarantee the constraint is meaningful. You could present a
formula that is always true, a tautology, and the ledger would still charge you. The
machine closes this separately via the dual-witness requirement: see the LASSERT
opcode description in Section 9.
The natural attack, and why it doesn’t work. The programmer declares flen in the
instruction encoding. What stops them from writing flen = 0 for a huge formula and
paying only S(0) = 1?
The hardware catches it. When LASSERT runs, the machine reads the formula’s actual encoded-unit count from the formula’s own header in memory and compares
it to the flen in the instruction. If they don’t match, the machine traps: the program counter jumps to LASSERT_TRAP_PC = 3840 = 0xF00 (a fixed trap address), the
error flag is set, and the check does not succeed. This trap-to-fixed-address behavior is unique to LASSERT. Every other error in the machine simply sets vm_err =
true and continues advancing the program counter normally (PC+1). LASSERT is
special because a mislength formula is a serious integrity violation, not a recoverable error. The µ cost is still charged. That detail matters. Failed checks are not
free. This is proven in StateSpaceCounting.v (lassert_honest_cost and
lassert_honest_mu_cost): if LASSERT completes without trapping, the declared
count equals the in-memory count, and the µ charge uses the real formula bits.

7 No Free Insight: the first conservation law
7.1 The abstract versions
Theorem 7.1 (Universal No Free Certification). Let C be any certification system with:
• a state type;
• an instruction type;
• a step function;
• a cost function;

20

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

• a certification predicate.
If every single-step transition from uncertified to certified has cost ≥ 1, then any trace that
starts uncertified and ends certified has total trace cost ≥ 1.
This theorem is substrate-independent. It does not know about registers, memory,
partitions, morphisms, CHSH trials, or the Thiele ISA. It says: once a model has a real
certification predicate and the one-step certification transition is priced, trace-level
non-free certification follows by induction. If that one-step premise fails, the model
permits free certification. If the model has no certification predicate, it cannot state
structural entitlement internally.
Theorem 7.2 (Thiele No Free Insight). For the Thiele Machine specifically, cert-channel
activation and certified predicate strengthening require structure-addition events, and those
events are in the positive-cost certification/revelation class.
This is the machine-level version. AbstractNoFI.v proves the two concrete cert
channels cannot be activated for free. NoFreeInsight.v adds the predicatestrengthening layer: once a stronger accepted predicate is tied to has_supra_cert,
the run must contain a structure-addition event.
7.2 The specific versions
For the Thiele Machine concretely, there are several specific versions. The two certification channels I mentioned in Section 5 are the formula-certification register
(csr_cert_addr) and the top-level flag (vm_certified). Both are defined precisely in Section 8.
Theorem 7.3 (No Free Certification, single step). If the formula-certification register goes
from absent to present in a single step, the instruction that caused it cost ≥ 1.
Theorem 7.4 (No Free Certification, trace level). If the formula-certification register was
absent at the start of a trace and is present at the end, then the trace paid at least 1 in µ.
Theorem 7.5 (No Free Certification via CERTIFY). If the top-level certified flag goes from
false to true in a single step, the instruction that caused it cost ≥ 1.
Theorem 7.6 (Both channels). For ANY transition of either certification channel from absent
to present, whether the formula register or the certified flag, µ grows by at least 1.
Theorem 7.6 is the master NoFI result. It covers both ways to get certified. There is no
third way.
7.3 What this means in practice
Run any program on the Thiele Machine. Watch the µ counter. If the program ends
with vm_certified = true or with csr_cert_addr nonzero, then somewhere in
the execution, µ went up by at least 1. You can audit the trace and find exactly where.
There is no program that can reach a certified state from scratch without paying for it.
This is what I mean by unforgeable. The µ ledger is the receipt. If you are certified, the
receipt exists.
21

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

8 The formal machine state
Definition 8.1 (Thiele Machine State). A Thiele Machine state s is a record with 12
fields:
• s.vm_graph: the partition graph. It contains module records, morphism records,
and fresh-ID counters.
• s.vm_csrs: control-status registers. In hardware design, there are two kinds
of registers. Data registers (like s.vm_regs) hold computation values. Controlstatus registers hold machine configuration and status. This record has four
fields:
– csr_cert_addr: 0 means nothing has been asserted yet. Set to the ASCII
checksum of the property string when MORPH_ASSERT succeeds (nonzero
for any non-empty property string). This is not a memory address — it is a
checksum fingerprint of the property that was asserted. Having a nonzero
value here means a structural property was certified and paid for.
– csr_status: general status code. Informational; not currently used to
gate opcodes.
– csr_err: error code. Nonzero means an instruction failed (bad argument,
missing morphism, locality violation, etc.).
– csr_heap_base: base address for HEAP_LOAD and HEAP_STORE.
Heap-relative memory access adds this base to the register-specified offset.
• s.vm_regs: a list of register values. The kernel fixes REG_COUNT = 16; register reads and writes wrap indices modulo REG_COUNT. The kernel proofs are
parametric in REG_COUNT.
• s.vm_mem: a list of data-memory words. The kernel fixes MEM_SIZE = 128;
memory reads and writes wrap indices modulo MEM_SIZE. The kernel proofs
are parametric in MEM_SIZE.
• s.vm_pc ∈ N: the program counter.
• s.vm_mu ∈ N: the structural cost ledger. Starts at 0. Never decreases.
• s.vm_mu_tensor: a 4×4 array of cost values (16 entries), indexed by direction
pairs (i, j). TENSOR_SET writes an entry, TENSOR_GET reads one. REVEAL
records disclosure costs at the direction index encoded in the instruction, so the
machine can track where a cost was paid across directions, not just how much. In
the kernel model these are natural numbers; in the hardware, 32-bit words. If
you don’t use the tensor tracking, ignore all 16 entries.
• s.vm_err ∈ {false, true}: the error flag. Set when an instruction fails.
• s.vm_logic_acc: a natural number serving two roles. First: the running accumulator for the Logic Engine during LASSERT — the on-chip unit that reads

22

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

formula words and certificate bytes and tracks validation state. Second: a key for
high-value operations. When vm_logic_acc equals the constant 0xCAFEEACE
(hexadecimal; 3,405,703,886 in decimal), certain high-value opcodes unlock. This
field exists so the Coq kernel and the physical hardware agree on its value after
every step.
• s.vm_mstatus: machine-status word, currently either 0 or 1. 0 means Turing
mode: the machine is executing ordinary computation, the partition graph and
morphism map are idle. 1 means Thiele mode: structural state is live. In the
current kernel, this field is a status indicator that records which operational
context the machine is in — it does not gate the structural opcodes at the step
level; the opcodes are always available. The field exists so the hardware and the
Coq model agree on machine status across the bridge proofs.
• s.vm_witness: the CHSH witness counters.
This is a record of 8
natural-number counters, one for each combination of (measurement setting pair) × (same/different outcome). The four setting pairs are ( a, b) ∈
{(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)}, using the standard Bell test convention where a is
Alice’s setting and b is Bob’s setting (as in Section 14). For each pair, there are two
counters: same-outcome (wc_same_ab) and different-outcome (wc_diff_ab).
Eight counters total: wc_same_00, wc_diff_00, wc_same_01, wc_diff_01,
wc_same_10, wc_diff_10, wc_same_11, wc_diff_11. Each CHSH_TRIAL
instruction increments exactly one counter. (Note: the CHSH_TRIAL opcode
and the Coq code name the setting parameters x, y and the outcome parameters
a, b — the reverse of this standard Bell test convention. The counter subscripts
00, 01, 10, 11 are numeric and unambiguous regardless of which letter names
the settings.) The CHSH score S is computed from the aggregate sums of these
counters. For each setting pair ( a, b), define Nab = wc_sameab + wc_diffab
(total trials with that setting) and Eab = (wc_sameab − wc_diffab )/Nab (the
correlation: fraction same minus fraction different, ranging from −1 to +1).
Then S = E00 + E01 + E10 − E11 . If no trials have been run for a setting (Nab = 0),
the correlator for that setting defaults to 0 by convention. Classically |S| ≤ 2;
√
the NPA algebraic model allows |S| ≤ 2 2 (see Section 14). The concrete Coq
definition is chsh_stat_from_wc in CHSHStatisticalBridge.v.
• s.vm_certified ∈ {false, true}: the top-level certification flag. Set by the
CERTIFY opcode.
The Coq kernel (the mathematical ground truth) and the physical hardware are intentionally not the same shape at every bit. The Coq kernel stores register and memory
values as natural numbers, but truncates writes through 64-bit word helpers to keep the
math clean. The hardware layer (explained in Section 13) is finite: 16 general-purpose
registers, 128 memory words, bounded tables. The bridge proofs in the hardware
section state exactly where those finite hardware representations match the kernel step;
the size constants are parametric so the same proofs apply at any bound.
23

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Definition 8.2 (Partition Graph). The partition graph s.vm_graph is a record:
• pg_next_id: the next fresh module identifier.
• pg_modules: a list of module-ID/module-record pairs. Each ModuleState
holds region data, axiom data, and the module’s µ-tensor.
• pg_next_morph_id: the next fresh morphism identifier.
• pg_morphisms: a list of morphism-ID/morphism-record pairs.
Each
MorphismState holds a source module, target module, coupling data, and
an identity flag.
Remark 8.1. There is no separate vm_heap, vm_output, or vm_imem field in the Coq
kernel’s VMState. Heap operations are heap-relative accesses into vm_mem. Output
and instruction transport live at the runner, trace, or RTL harness layer, not as kernel
state fields. This distinction matters because NoFI is a theorem about the state record
above.
Remark 8.2. The partition graph has two distinct layers. The module layer records
how the state is decomposed into named pieces. The morphism layer records typed
categorical relationships between those pieces. These layers are independent. Two machine states can agree on every module while differing in their morphism maps. This
independence is what makes the Categorical Separation Theorem possible (Section 11).

9 The instruction set: all 46 opcodes
The Thiele Machine has 46 opcodes. Every one carries an explicit mu_delta parameter.
Cost is part of the instruction, not an annotation.
9.1 Group 1: Partition operations (4 opcodes)
These opcodes modify the partition graph. They are how the machine builds structural
knowledge.
PNEW(R, δ): allocate a new module.
Creates a fresh module and charges δ to µ. The instruction carries a region list R
describing which memory addresses belong to this module. The current hardwarealigned semantics normalize this to a canonical form: they only keep the size (how
many addresses) and store it as the range 0, 1, ..., sz-1. So the checked step
preserves the module size, not arbitrary input geometry. The bounded RTL has its
own partition-table and active-module machinery for locality enforcement, but PNEW
itself is the graph allocation step.
Why does this exist? Because structural knowledge needs a home. Creating a module
is how you tell the machine “this region of computation is a named unit I’m tracking.”
The cost δ is programmer-declared and can be 0; the machine does not force you to
pay for allocation itself. If building this partition cost something because you had to
figure out the right boundary, run a search, or derive the structure, you record that
24

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

here. If it was bookkeeping, δ = 0 is fine.
PSPLIT(m, L, R, δ): split one module into two.
Splits module m and charges δ to µ. The constructor still carries left and right region
payloads, but the current hardware-aligned step ignores those payloads and calls
graph_hw_psplit: the left side gets half the module size, and the right side gets the
remainder. This is the refinement operation in the finite hardware model. If discovering
the split deserves a cost, encode a positive δ; the canonical reversible-accounting policy
keeps it at 0.
PMERGE(m1 , m2 , δ): merge two modules into one.
Merges modules m1 and m2 and charges δ. The hardware-aligned step concatenates
the module sizes through graph_hw_pmerge; module IDs wrap modulo 64. It does
not perform a rich invariant-compatibility check in this step. Like PNEW and PSPLIT,
the machine does not enforce a minimum cost here. The mandatory cost comes later if
you try to certify a claim about the structure.
PDISCOVER(m, evidence, δ): query partition structure.
The evidence payload is carried by the instruction, but the hardware-aligned relation
does not attach axioms or mutate the graph. It advances the PC and charges δ. This is
a placeholder for discovery accounting, not a register query in the current kernel step.
9.2 Group 2: Logic and certification (3 opcodes)
These opcodes interact with the Logic Engine, the on-chip finite-state machine that
verifies formulas and certificates.
LASSERT(freg, creg, kind, flen, cost): assert and certify a formula.
Reads a formula whose declared encoded-word count is flen from memory starting
at the address in register freg. The kind boolean flag selects which certificate path the
Logic Engine should follow. “SAT” (satisfiable) means: I’m claiming this formula has
at least one satisfying assignment — some combination of variable values that makes
it true. “UNSAT” (unsatisfiable) means: I’m claiming it has no satisfying assignment
— it’s always false. In the current on-chip semantics, kind = true is the SAT path:
it requires a dual-witness certificate (one satisfying assignment and one falsifying
assignment) so the validation actually proves the formula is non-trivially satisfiable.
kind = false is reserved for a UNSAT path that the current kernel does not implement:
lassert_check_ok returns false unconditionally when kind = false, so any LASSERT
issued with kind = false fails the check, traps to LASSERT_TRAP_PC, and sets the error
flag — the µ-cost is still charged either way. This matches the RTL FSM, which has
only phases 0 (idle), 1 (header read), and 2 (scan); the historical UNSAT phases 3 and
4 have been removed from the current implementation. The kernel and hardware
both validate that the declared count matches the in-memory formula header before
the check is allowed to succeed. A mismatch traps and sets the error flag. Reads a

25

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

certificate block from memory starting at the address in register creg. In the tightened
architecture, that block contains two witnesses: one satisfying assignment and one
falsifying assignment. The on-chip Logic Engine FSM processes the formula and
both witnesses in-place without external solver calls. Validation succeeds only if the
declared count is honest, the first witness satisfies the formula, and the second witness
falsifies it. That means the formula is not a tautology and really excludes at least one
state. LASSERT itself is a checked validation step; certification channels are activated
by the concrete state-changing paths such as CERTIFY and MORPH_ASSERT, while
the abstract cert-address theorem treats LASSERT as part of the certification/revelation
class. Charges flen × 8 + S(cost) to µ, even when the check fails.
This is the most important logic opcode in the machine. It is where a constraint package
is checked before any later certification step can lean on it. You cannot fake the pricing
anymore by declaring a tiny flen for a large in-memory formula: if the header and the
instruction disagree, the machine traps. You also cannot fake semantic narrowing with
a tautology: the dual-witness requirement closes the tautology-inflation hole because
there is no falsifying witness to show the formula excluded any state. The cost formula
is still a spend ledger. The honest-length check and the non-triviality witness are what
tie that spend to the real checked object.
LJOIN(c1reg, c2reg, δ): join two certificates.
Combines two memory-resident certificates into a single composite certificate. The
addresses of the input certificates are in c1reg and c2reg. Charges S(δ) ≥ 1. This
supports constructing complex multi-part proofs from simpler pieces.
MDLACC(m, δ): MDL cost accounting.
Charges δ as a module-discovery/model-description cost for module m. It does not
read a register, and it does not mutate the graph.
Suppose you have two models that both fit the same data. One model is a ten-thousandparameter neural network. The other is a five-line formula. Both fit the training set.
Which one are you buying? The minimum-description-length principle says: the total
bill is the model description itself plus the cost of encoding the data once you have
the model. The description length of a model is how many bits you need to write it
down — a simple formula takes very few bits; a massive network takes many. The
short formula costs more to encode data with, but costs almost nothing to describe.
The massive network achieves perfect in-sample compression, but its own description
is enormous. The correct choice minimizes the sum of (bits to describe the model) +
(bits to encode the data given the model).
Translated to the Thiele Machine vocabulary: a module structure that you built has a
description-length cost. Not because someone told you it does, but because constructing a specific partition of state space may require information that should be billed.
MDLACC is the opcode that lets a program explicitly enter that description cost into

26

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Opcode

What it does

Typical cost

LOAD_IMM(r, v, δ)
XFER(rdst , rsrc , δ)
ADD(rd , r a , rb , δ)
SUB(rd , r a , rb , δ)
MUL(rd , r a , rb , δ)
AND(rd , r a , rb , δ)
OR(rd , r a , rb , δ)
SHL(rd , r a , rb , δ)
SHR(rd , r a , rb , δ)
LUI(rd , v, δ)
XOR_LOAD(rd , addr, δ)

Write immediate value v into register r
Copy register rsrc to rdst
rd ← r a + rb (modular 64-bit)
rd ← r a − rb (modular 64-bit)
rd ← r a × rb
rd ← r a AND rb (bitwise)
rd ← r a OR rb (bitwise)
rd ← r a shifted left by rb bits
rd ← r a shifted right by rb bits
Load upper immediate: rd ← v ≪ 8
Load from absolute memory address
addr into rd
rd ← rd XOR rs (XOR accumulate)
Swap registers r a and rb (reversible, direct two-write exchange)
rd ← popcount(rs ) (Hamming weight)

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

XOR_ADD(rd , rs , δ)
XOR_SWAP(r a , rb , δ)
XOR_RANK(rd , rs , δ)

0
0 by convention
0

the ledger after the structure has been built. It performs no graph change. Its sole effect
is to advance the program counter and charge the encoded δ. The connection to MDL
is not a citation to a 1978 paper; it is the claim that the machine’s natural µ-accounting
can track what information-theoretic compression theory says a model costs, when the
program chooses to enter that cost.
9.3 Group 3: Compute and data transfer (14 opcodes)
Standard arithmetic and data movement. These are the operations you find in every
ISA. They mostly carry δ = 0 because they do not introduce new structural knowledge.
They just compute.
Why does the ISA have all these? Because the Thiele Machine is a complete computing
machine, not just a structural accounting system. Programs need to compute intermediate values, manage data, and control flow. The compute group provides all of that.
The key property: none of these opcodes touch the certification channels. They cannot
create certified structural knowledge.
XOR_SWAP is a reversible register swap. The kernel implements it as a direct twowrite exchange (not the XOR-trick sequence a ⊕= b; b ⊕= a; a ⊕= b, despite the
name). It carries δ = 0 by convention because a reversible swap does not increase
information entropy.
9.4 Group 4: Memory and control flow (8 opcodes)
Memory access and program flow control.

27

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Opcode

What it does

LOAD(rd , r a , δ)

Load vm_mem[r a ] into rd

STORE(r a , rs , δ)
JUMP(addr, δ)
JNEZ(r, addr, δ)
CALL(addr, δ)
RET(δ)
HALT(δ)

CHECKPOINT(ℓ, δ)

Note

Kernel registerindirect load
Store register rs into vm_mem[r a ]
Kernel registerindirect store
Set PC to addr unconditionally
none
Jump to addr if r ̸= 0
none
Push return address via stack pointer r15, Qed coverage
jump to addr
Pop return address via stack pointer r15, Qed coverage
jump there
Advances PC, charges δ. Stops when PC runner-level
exceeds program length. HALT in the
middle does not stop execution.
label outside
Accept label ℓ, advance PC
kernel

At the kernel level, LOAD and STORE are register-indirect memory operations over
vm_mem. At the RTL/cosimulation layer, the partition wall adds active-module locality
checks. INIT_PT and INIT_ACTIVE_MODULE are harness setup commands for that
finite hardware table, not VM opcodes and not fields of VMState. This is the honest
split: the abstract ISA defines memory semantics; the bounded hardware layer enforces
locality through its own table state.
9.5 Group 5: Revelation, I/O, heap, and tensor (7 opcodes)
This group mixes two fundamentally different kinds of operations. EMIT and
READ_PORT are in the certification/revelation cost class — they cost ≥ 1 unconditionally
and are subject to the same mandatory-floor rule as CERTIFY and MORPH_ASSERT.
WRITE_PORT, HEAP_LOAD, and HEAP_STORE are ordinary I/O and storage, no
mandatory floor. TENSOR_SET and TENSOR_GET manage per-module cost tensors.
The shared table is a historical artifact; the cost semantics are distinct.

28

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Opcode

What it does

Cost

READ_PORT(r, c, v, bits, δ)

Write value v into register r. The value
v is embedded in the instruction encoding at assembly time (the kernel step
is deterministic: it writes the declared
v, not a runtime port read). Channel
c and the bits count are used by the
runner/environment layer for I/O orchestration and cost accountability.
Send register rs to channel c outside
kernel state
Emit payload as a certified trace event

bits + S(δ) ≥ 1

WRITE_PORT(c, rs , δ)
EMIT(m, payload, δ)
HEAP_LOAD(rd , r a , δ)
HEAP_STORE(r a , rs , δ)
TENSOR_SET(m, i, j, v, δ)
TENSOR_GET(rd , m, i, j, δ)

Load
from
csr_heap_base +
regs[r a ] into rd
Store rs to csr_heap_base +
regs[r a ]
Set per-module tensor entry (i, j)
Read per-module tensor entry (i, j)
into rd

δ

|payload|bits
S(δ) ≥ 1
δ

+

δ
δ
δ

EMIT and READ_PORT are in the certification/revelation cost class, but their cost
goes beyond the simple S(δ) floor. EMIT charges |payload|bits + S(δ): the machine
unfolds the emitted payload into concrete bits and charges for those bits directly, then
adds at least 1 for the certification step. A one-byte ASCII payload has 8 payload bits,
so with δ = 0 it costs 9. A ten-byte ASCII payload has 80 payload bits, so with δ = 0
it costs 81. The programmer cannot emit more bits for the same price as fewer bits.
READ_PORT charges bits + S(δ): the number of bits being read from the port, plus
at least 1. More information in means more µ paid. The floor is still there; zero-cost
certification remains impossible, and the cost tracks the actual bit content.
TENSOR_SET and TENSOR_GET manage per-module metric tensor entries, storing the 4×4 geometric weight matrix used by the morphism algebra. The kernel tensor is a flattened 4×4 vector. The hardware has dedicated tensor state,
and the bisimulation proofs cover both TENSOR opcodes unconditionally in
GraphReconstructionBridge.v and RTLGapRegistry.v. Bad tensor indices
latch error in both semantics; good indices agree step-for-step.
9.6 Group 6: Witness and certification (3 opcodes)
These opcodes accumulate binary game outcome statistics into hardware witness
counters and manage the top-level certification flag.
CHSH_TRIAL(x, y, a, b, δ): record one CHSH trial.
Records one trial of the CHSH game. x ∈ {0, 1} is Alice’s measurement setting.
y ∈ {0, 1} is Bob’s measurement setting. a ∈ {0, 1} is Alice’s outcome. b ∈ {0, 1} is
Bob’s outcome. The Coq constructor order is settings first (x, y), then outcomes (a,
29

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

b). The instruction increments exactly one of the 8 WitnessCount counters: if a = b
(same outcome), it increments wc_same_xy; if a ̸= b (different outcome), it increments
wc_diff_xy. There are 4 setting pairs × 2 same/different buckets = 8 counters. The
CHSH score S is computed later from these counters. Charges δ to µ.
This is a Tier 0 operation: it records data but does not activate any certification channel.
It is provably free in the sense that CHSH_TRIAL does not and cannot trigger a certinsight event (proven in WitnessInsightGeneral.v, chsh_trial_is_tier0).
One validation: if any of x, y, a, b is not in {0, 1} — for example, passing x=5 — the
machine fires a bad-bits error step: the error flag latches, no counter is incremented,
but the cost is still charged. The machine does not silently count invalid inputs as valid
trials.
CERTIFY(δ): top-level proof-carrying certification.
Sets vm_certified = true, charges S(δ) ≥ 1 to µ, advances PC. This is the simplest cert-channel activation: you are saying “I, the program, certify that this execution
has reached an attested state.” The flag is set. The cost is charged. There is no way
to set vm_certified = true without this opcode, and this opcode always charges
≥ 1.
REVEAL(m, bits, cert, δ): disclose a value.
Reveals bits bits from module m with certificate string cert. A bit-commitment protocol
is a two-phase scheme: first you commit to a value (seal it in an envelope), later you
reveal it. The reveal step proves you didn’t change your answer after seeing the other
side’s response. REVEAL is the disclosure half of that scheme. REVEAL charges
bits + S(δ): the number of bits being disclosed, plus at least 1. The cost is also recorded
in the µ-tensor at the direction index encoded in the instruction, marking where in
the morphism geometry the disclosure cost lands. Revealing 0 bits still costs at least
1. Revealing 32 bits costs at least 33. You cannot disclose more for the same price
as less. This is what makes the revelation requirement concrete: obtaining attested
cross-correlations from binary game trials requires an explicit disclosure instruction,
and that disclosure is priced by how much you reveal.
MORPH_ASSERT (see Group 7): it activates the cert channel and belongs conceptually
here too, but is listed in the morphism group because it operates on a morphism ID.
9.7 Group 7: Categorical morphism operations (7 opcodes)
These are the opcodes that operate on the categorical morphism layer
of the partition graph.
Six of them (MORPH, COMPOSE, MORPH_ID,
MORPH_DELETE, MORPH_ASSERT, MORPH_TENSOR) modify graph state and
is_classical_opcode returns false on them. MORPH_GET only reads graph state
into a register and is classified as classical by that predicate, even though a Turing
Machine still has to simulate the graph on its tape to evaluate it. A Turing Machine
can simulate programs using these opcodes by encoding the full Thiele state on its
30

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

tape, but only by also implementing the µ-ledger cost semantics — any simulation
that omits that accounting loses the structural entitlement guarantees.
A morphism is a record saying: “module A is related to module B in this specific,
named way.” Not just “A and B exist.” Not just “A and B are connected by an edge.”
A morphism has a source module ID, a target module ID, coupling data (a list of
(source-cell, target-cell) pairs plus a label string), and an is-identity flag.
The coupling data is actual relational content. MORPH creates a morphism with an
empty coupling list initially. COMPOSE computes the relational composition of two
morphisms’ coupling lists: pair ( a, c) is included if and only if there exists b such
that ( a, b) is in the first coupling and (b, c) is in the second. This is proven correct
in CategoryBridge.v. MORPH_TENSOR concatenates two coupling lists. The
coupling is not a programmer tag. It is data the machine builds and proves properties
about. You can read back the number of coupling pairs via MORPH_GET (selector 2).
Why does this matter? Because two programs can have identical classical state (same
registers, same memory, same µ) while having completely different morphism maps.
A classical machine cannot distinguish them. The Thiele Machine can, via a single
morphism probe. This is the Categorical Separation Theorem (Section 11).

Opcode

Effect

MORPH(rd , s, t, c, δ)

MORPH_ID(rd , m, δ)

Create morphism s → t, write ID into rd . Empty δ
coupling. (c carried but unused.)
Compose m1 : A → B with m2 : B → C (re- δ
quires target of m1 = source of m2 ). Coupling =
relational composition.
Identity morphism on module m.
δ

MORPH_DELETE(id, δ)

Delete morphism id. Error if not found.

COMPOSE(rd , m1 , m2 , δ)

Cost

δ

MORPH_ASSERT(id, prop, Assert morphism id exists with non-empty S(δ)
cert, δ)
property prop.
Sets csr_cert_addr =
checksum(prop) on success. Always charges
S(δ) ≥ 1.
MORPH_TENSOR(rd , m1 , Tensor m1 ⊗ m2 : requires disjoint source/target δ
m2 , δ)
regions. New morphism from union-source to
union-target. Coupling = concatenation.
MORPH_GET(r, id, sel, δ)
Read field (0=source, 1=target, 2=#coupling- δ
pairs, 3=is-identity) of morphism id into r.
MORPH_ASSERT deserves special attention. It charges S(δ) ≥ 1 regardless of whether
the assertion succeeds. This is the sharpest instance of No Free Insight: the attempt
to claim structural knowledge costs something, even when the claim is false. A failed
assertion is not free. A machine without a structural ledger has no way to express this
31

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

constraint. In the Thiele Machine it is enforced by the step semantics and proven in
AbstractNoFI.v.
9.8 Why 46 opcodes?
The number 46 comes from what the machine needs to do:
• Compute arithmetic and data: 14 ops (LOAD_IMM, XFER, ADD, SUB, MUL,
AND, OR, SHL, SHR, LUI, XOR_LOAD, XOR_ADD, XOR_SWAP, XOR_RANK)
• Memory and control flow: 8 ops (LOAD, STORE, JUMP, JNEZ, CALL, RET,
HALT, CHECKPOINT)
• I/O, heap, and tensor: 7 ops (READ_PORT, WRITE_PORT, EMIT, HEAP_LOAD,
HEAP_STORE, TENSOR_SET, TENSOR_GET)
• Partition structure: 4 ops (PNEW, PSPLIT, PMERGE, PDISCOVER)
• Logic and certification: 3 ops (LASSERT, LJOIN, MDLACC)
• Witness and certification flags: 3 ops (CHSH_TRIAL, CERTIFY, REVEAL)
• Categorical morphisms:
7 ops (MORPH, COMPOSE, MORPH_ID,
MORPH_DELETE, MORPH_ASSERT, MORPH_TENSOR, MORPH_GET)
14 + 8 + 7 + 4 + 3 + 3 + 7 = 46.
Every opcode exists for a reason. None are redundant. If you removed CERTIFY, you
could not activate vm_certified. If you removed MORPH, you could not build
morphism relationships. If you removed CHSH_TRIAL, you could not track 2-player
binary game statistics. The ISA is designed, not grown.

10 What a categorical morphism is: the category theory, from scratch
Category theory from scratch. I didn’t know what it was when I started this project.
10.1 The idea of a category
A category is a collection of two things: objects and arrows between them.
The objects can be anything. In abstract math, they might be sets, or vector spaces, or
topological spaces. In the Thiele Machine, the objects are modules (partitions of state).
The arrows are also called morphisms. An arrow goes from one object to another:
f : A → B means “there is an arrow f from object A to object B.” The arrow does
not have to be a function. In the Thiele Machine, a morphism just says “there is a
relationship of this type between these two modules.”
Two laws must hold:
1. Composition: If f : A → B and g : B → C, there must exist a composite
g ◦ f : A → C. This is what COMPOSE implements.
32

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

2. Identity: For every object A, there must exist an identity arrow id A : A → A.
This is what MORPH_ID implements.
And composition must be associative: (h ◦ g) ◦ f = h ◦ ( g ◦ f ).
Why composition? Because you want to chain relationships. If A relates to B and
B relates to C, you want to say A therefore relates to C, transitively, without having
to name every possible A-to-C path individually. Without composition, the structure collapses into a flat list of unconnected pairs. It’s entirely useless for multi-hop
reasoning.
Why identity? Because every object needs a minimal self-relationship. An isolated
module with no connections to anything else still needs to be expressible in the
framework. MORPH_ID is how you say “module A relates to itself with no coupling
content.” Without it, isolated objects fall outside the framework entirely, and any
module with zero external relationships becomes unrepresentable.
Why associativity? Because the parenthesization of a chain should not matter. Whether
you write (h ◦ g) ◦ f or h ◦ ( g ◦ f ), both mean the same three-hop path A → B →
C → D. If associativity failed, two programs that build the same chain in different
groupings would produce different morphisms. That is a bug: the chain is the thing,
not how you assembled it.
These laws are proven in Coq in CategoryLaws.v. Concretely: morphisms carry
coupling data, a list of (source-cell, target-cell) pairs plus a label. A “cell” is a natural number indexing into a module’s memory region. A coupling pair ( a, c) says:
cell a in the source module is related to cell c in the target module. The coupling
is the relational content of the morphism — the actual evidence of which parts of
one module correspond to which parts of another. COMPOSE produces a new morphism whose coupling pairs are the relational composition of the two inputs: ( a, c)
is included when there exists an intermediate cell b such that ( a, b) is in the first
coupling and (b, c) is in the second. This is the standard relational composition (like
matrix multiplication but for sets of pairs). This is proven in CategoryBridge.v
(graph_compose_morphisms_coupling). The Thiele Machine’s categorical layer
is not just called a category; it satisfies the actual axioms on the actual coupling data.
10.2 Why modules as objects
In the Thiele Machine, the objects of the category are the modules of the partition
graph. A module is a named piece of the computation: it owns a region of memory or
state, it may carry certified axioms about that region, and it contributes a local µ cost.
A morphism between two modules says: “there is a named relationship between
module A and module B, with explicit coupling data.” The coupling data is a list of
(source-cell, target-cell) pairs. COMPOSE computes the relational composition of two
33

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

couplings: pair ( a, c) is in the composed coupling exactly when there exists b such that
( a, b) is in the first coupling and (b, c) is in the second. This is proven correct. The
machine tracks it. Via MORPH_GET (selector 2), you can read back the number of
coupling pairs in any morphism.
What the coupling pairs represent is up to the programmer. They could encode:
• Module B refines module A (which cells in A map to which cells in B)
• Module A entangles with module B (which cell-pairs are correlated)
• Module A simulates module B (which states correspond)
The machine enforces the relational composition correctly. The interpretation is yours.
10.3 Why this is not just “extra state”
Here is the question I asked myself for a long time: if you can just add extra registers
to a classical machine to store morphism IDs, why is the categorical layer special?
The answer is in the MORPH_ASSERT opcode and in the Categorical Separation
Theorem.
Extra registers do not have provenance. You can write anything into a register. You can
write 42 into register 5 and claim it is a morphism ID. But the Thiele Machine checks:
did a MORPH instruction actually run that created morphism 42 with the source and
target you claim? If not, MORPH_ASSERT fails. And MORPH_ASSERT costs S(δ) ≥ 1
even if it fails.
Building the morphism chain by calling MORPH, COMPOSE, and MORPH_ID is free
when those instructions carry δ = 0. Those ops don’t have a mandatory positive floor.
What costs is MORPH_ASSERT: the act of asserting that the morphism exists and
activating the cert channel. That always costs S(δ) ≥ 1. You can build the chain for
free, but you cannot certify it for free.
This is why the morphism layer is not “extra state.” It is provenance-bearing state. The
machine knows where it came from. A classical machine cannot fake this at the same
cost. That is the Categorical Separation Theorem.

11 Categorical separation: the machine is strictly richer
Theorem 11.1 (Categorical Separation). There exist states s1 and s2 such that:
• s1 .vm_regs = s2 .vm_regs (identical registers)
• s1 .vm_mem = s2 .vm_mem (identical memory)
• s1 .vm_mu = s2 .vm_mu (identical µ)
• s1 .vm_err = s2 .vm_err (identical error flag)

34

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

• s1 .vm_pc = s2 .vm_pc (identical program counter)
• s1 .vm_certified = s2 .vm_certified (identical top-level certification flag)
yet their morphism graphs differ. In the concrete witness, one state has an identity morphism
in pg_morphisms; the other has no morphisms.
Construction. Build s1 with pg_morphisms = [(0, id)].
Build s2 with
pg_morphisms = []. Set every classical field the same: registers, memory, µ, PC,
error flag, and vm_certified. The equality proof is by reflexivity on those fields.
The graph distinction is by list constructor mismatch: a one-element morphism list is
not the empty list.
Theorem 11.2 (Shadow Separation). There exist two states with the same classical shadow
but different morphism graphs, and a legitimate graph-preserving probe after which the
morphism-level distinction remains.
The probe used in ShadowProjection.v is deliberately boring: ADD 0 0 0 0. It
is not a morphism operation. That is the point. The theorem is not relying on a failing
probe to manufacture a difference. The difference is already in the structural state, and
ordinary classical projection cannot see it.
Corollary 11.3 (Classical observer is blind, ShadowProjection.v). No function of
(registers, memory, µ, PC, error, certified) can separate all Thiele states. The classical shadow
is strictly lossy.
Corollary 11.4 (Thiele strictly extends classical, TuringStrictness.v). Every program in the classical fragment — programs restricted to is_classical_opcode, meaning
no graph mutations, no cert-channel ops, no witness ops — leaves pg_next_id unchanged.
There exist Thiele programs that change pg_next_id (via PNEW). Therefore Thiele strictly
extends the classical fragment: it can represent and probe states that no program in that
fragment can reach. A Universal Turing Machine can simulate the full Thiele state by encoding
it on tape; what it cannot do is produce that state without expending the equivalent structural
work — the µ-ledger cost is preserved under any faithful simulation.
The classical machine simulates inside the Thiele Machine faithfully (every classical
program runs correctly, no side effects on the structural layer). But the Thiele Machine
has programs that escape the classical fragment. This is proven, not claimed.

12 The knowledge receipt: what makes certification unforgeable
Four concrete facts about why the µ ledger is unforgeable.
Act 1: The attempt costs, even when it fails.
Run MORPH_ASSERT(k, “test”, “”, 0) where morphism k does not exist. What happens:

35

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

• vm_err becomes true (the assertion failed — morphism k not found).
• csr_cert_addr stays 0 — the cert channel is NOT activated on failure.
• µ increases by S(0) = 1 regardless (the attempt cost something).
The machine paid for a failed assertion. A machine without a structural ledger has no
way to express this. In the Thiele Machine, the cost of claiming knowledge is charged
whether or not the claim is true.
Act 2: Build the chain.
Run this sequence:
PNEW( A), PNEW( B), PNEW(C )
MORPH( f , A, B), MORPH( g, B, C )
COMPOSE(h, f , g)
Then MORPH_GET(r0 , h, source) and MORPH_GET(r1 , h, target). The resulting state
has r0 = A, r1 = C, and morphism h : A → C exists in the morphism map. With δ = 0
on each build step, µ = 0. The morphism exists, but no structural cost has been paid
yet.
Act 3: Certify.
Run MORPH_ASSERT(h, “composed”, “”, 0). Morphism h exists and the property
string “composed” is non-empty. The assertion succeeds. csr_cert_addr goes to
the ASCII checksum of “composed” (nonzero). Tier 1 cert channel activated. µ goes up
by S(0) = 1.
(Why must the property string be non-empty? Because csr_cert_addr stores the ASCII
checksum of the property string. If property = “”, checksum = 0, and the channel stays
at 0 — not activated. Any non-empty string works; “composed” is just an example
label.)
The machine now holds a µ-ledger entry: at this point in the trace, a morphism
assertion was made and paid for. The receipt is in the ledger. It cannot be removed. It
cannot be backdated. µ never goes down.
Act 4: Classical programs cannot forge it.
Program B takes a shortcut: it loads r0 = A and r1 = C via LOAD_IMM. Classical
state is identical: same registers, same µ (both zero). No morphism h was ever created.
Apply MORPH_DELETE(h): Program A (Act 2) succeeds. Program B fails and sets err.
The µ ledger is not a counter that measures how much work was done. It is a record of

36

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

which structural commitments were made. Program B did the same amount of “work”
(in the µ sense) but did different work. The machine knows the difference.

13 How the machine is built: three layers
The Thiele Machine exists in three forms. They are intended to implement the same
semantics. The three layers are tied together by refinement proofs and automated tests.
13.1 Layer 1: The Coq kernel
This is the mathematical ground truth. The Coq kernel defines:
• The VMState record (all 12 fields, as in Section 8)
• The vm_instruction type (all 46 opcodes as Coq inductive constructors)
• The vm_apply function: takes a state and instruction, returns a state. Total.
Always returns something.
• All the theorems: NoFI, µ-monotonicity, µ-initiality, categorical separation, Turing strictness, etc.
The Coq kernel operates mostly over natural numbers, but the machine state is not
an unbounded fantasy object. It fixes REG_COUNT = 16 registers and MEM_SIZE =
128 memory words in the synthesized RTL, and its accessors wrap indices through
those sizes. Both constants are parametric in the proofs — nothing in the formal chain
depends on these specific numbers. Register and memory writes are truncated by the
kernel’s 64-bit word helpers. µ itself is a natural number and can grow without a fixed
machine-word ceiling in the kernel. The RTL target then instantiates a finite 32-bit
datapath and bounded tables.
Zero Admitted means: no step in any theorem proof was asserted without derivation.
The machine checked everything. I did not.
13.2 Layer 2: The OCaml extracted runner
Coq can automatically extract executable code from a Coq development. The language
it targets here is OCaml — a general-purpose programming language. “Extraction”
means: Coq keeps the computational content of the definitions and throws away
the proof terms. A function like vm_apply (which defines what every opcode does)
extracts to an OCaml function that computes the same thing. The extracted result is
not a translation of the proofs — the proofs are erased. What remains is the algorithm.
The extracted runner executes all 46 opcodes from the Coq semantics, including the
morphism operations.
The trust boundary here is named explicitly. OCamlExtractionBridge.v proves
formal facts about the Coq-side observable shadow_to_eo (vm_apply s i): exact µ accounting, nondecreasing µ, and totality. It also names the external runner
boundary. The current file does not contain a real unproved Coq Hypothesis called
37

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

ocaml_runner_agrees; the lemma with that name is a reflexive Coq-side witness.
The actual cross-language claim, that the built OCaml binary returns the same observable as the Coq semantics, is checked by the parity test suite. I don’t count that as a
kernel theorem. It is an audited extraction boundary backed by tests.
13.3 Layer 3: The Kami RTL hardware
The Kami framework lets you write hardware specifications in Coq and extract them to
Bluespec SystemVerilog. Bluespec SystemVerilog is a high-level hardware description
language: you describe what the hardware should compute, including the registers,
the rules, and the conditions under which state transitions fire. The Bluespec compiler generates standard Verilog RTL. Verilog RTL is the low-level gate-and-register
description that synthesis tools can compile into actual logic gates on an FPGA (a
reconfigurable chip you can program after manufacturing) or an ASIC (a custom
chip manufactured for a specific design, not reprogrammable). The Thiele Machine
hardware is defined in ThieleCPUCore.v (Kami module) and extracted through this
pipeline.
The hardware has:
• 16 registers, each 32 bits wide (RegCount = 16; kernel proofs parametric)
• 128-bit instruction encoding (InstrSz = 128)
• 128 words of data memory and 128 instruction words (MemSize = 128; kernel
proofs parametric in MEM_SIZE)
• bounded instruction transport and execution state
• 64 partition module slots (PTableSz = 64)
• 16 slots in each of the morphism, coupling, formula, certificate, descriptormetadata, and coupling-pair tables
• An on-chip LASSERT FSM for formula verification (with 64-entry inlined backing
buffers)
• The µ ledger updated atomically with each executed instruction (no separate
parallel datapath; the cost arithmetic happens inside the same step rule)
The synthesis target is the Xilinx Artix-7 xc7a35tcsg324-1 on the Arty A735T board, driven through a fully open-source toolchain: yosys (synth_xilinx
-family xc7 -nodsp), nextpnr-xilinx (openXC7), and prjxray’s xc7frames2bit.
The CI workflow at .github/workflows/ci-full.yml runs both halves on every
relevant push: the hardware-synthesis job produces a JSON netlist plus a simulation
VCD waveform from iverilog, and the fpga-bitstream job produces a real .bit file
loadable on the Arty board. Current synthesis: 14,643 LUTs, 3,582 flip-flops, 173 carry
chains, 64 distributed RAMs, 2 block RAMs (72 Kbit), 0 DSP slices — about 65% of
the device’s logic cells. The size constants above (16 registers, 128 data words, 128

38

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

instruction words) are calibrated to fit that part with comfortable margin; the kernel
proofs are parametric in REG_COUNT and MEM_SIZE, so the same proofs apply at any
bound the device permits.
All 46 opcodes are implemented in the RTL design: ThieleCPUCore.v has hardware
logic for all of them. The question is not which opcodes are in hardware, but which
opcodes have a completed formal bisimulation proof.
A bisimulation proof says: given the same starting state and the same instruction,
the hardware and the Coq model produce the same output state. Not “similar” or
“equivalent in some abstract sense.” Literally: the hardware’s answer equals the Coq
model’s answer, field by field. It is a step-by-step correspondence, verified in Coq.
Formal bisimulation proofs exist for all 46 opcodes (zero Admitted, all Qed). Here is
the precise breakdown:
• 30 opcodes are truly unconditional. These are the SupportedOpcode
group: True in Coq, no conditions whatsoever. They cover all standard
compute, load/store, jump, I/O, and certification operations that don’t involve morphism tables or formula checking. Verified in EmbedStep.v
(embed_step_compute).
• 6 opcodes require valid instruction arguments. The hardware and Coq model
AGREE on the error path for invalid arguments, so no semantic disagreement
exists — but the success-path proof requires the argument to be in range:
– CALL: stack pointer must be in bounds (WellFormedSnapshot), and
pc < MEM_SIZE.
– RET: stack pointer must be in bounds (WellFormedSnapshot).
– CHSH_TRIAL: all four values x, y, a, b must be in {0, 1}. Passing 5 as an
outcome value triggers the bad-bits error path — on which both hardware
and VM agree.
– TENSOR_SET: indices i, j must both be < 4 (valid for a 4×4 tensor).
– TENSOR_GET: indices valid AND the module must exist in the graph.
– LASSERT: the declared formula-unit count flen must match the actual inmemory formula header. (Mismatch causes a trap to 0xF00, on which both
sides agree; the precondition is needed for the success-path proof.)
Covered in EmbedStep_WF.v (CALL, RET, CHSH_TRIAL) and
GraphReconstructionBridge.v (TENSOR_SET, TENSOR_GET, LASSERT).
• 10 opcodes carry Qed proofs under structural invariants that hold
inductively from hardware reset.
Seven from the morphism group
(MORPH, MORPH_ID, MORPH_DELETE, MORPH_ASSERT, MORPH_GET,
COMPOSE, MORPH_TENSOR) and three graph-shaping opcodes

39

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

(PNEW, PSPLIT, PMERGE). The preconditions are coupling_wf
(=
coupling_desc_bounded ∧ coupling_pairs_in_range ∧
coupling_pairs_fully_populated) and morph_table_wf.
Both
invariants are proved to hold at hardware reset and to be preserved by
every kami_step operation:
coupling_wf_kami_step_preserved
and morph_table_wf_kami_step_preserved. So the precondition is
discharged in practice for any state reachable by machine execution; no
unreachable-state caveat applies. PNEW/PSPLIT/PMERGE additionally need
pt_well_formed and arithmetic side conditions that are likewise inductive.
The official classification (coq/kami_hw/RTLGapRegistry.v,
theorem
rtl_coverage_partition) records the partition 36 + 10 + 0 = 46, all Qed,
zero structural gaps. rtl_gap_count = 0 witnesses the empty gap registry.
The 46/46 proof coverage (all Qed) is the correct relationship between an abstract ISA
and its physical instantiation. The abstract model defines what is correct; the hardware
implements all of it; all 46 opcodes have formal bisimulation proofs. This is not a
deficiency. It is honest proof accounting.
The abstract Thiele Machine is the Coq kernel. The hardware is a finite physical
instantiation with explicit table sizes and word widths. The proofs state the bridge
between them under the finite representation invariants where those invariants are
needed. This is the only honest relationship physical hardware can have with an
abstract mathematical model.

14 Algebraic Robustness: Binary Game Statistics and the µ-Ledger
The Thiele Machine has an opcode called CHSH_TRIAL that records outcomes of
a 2-player binary game into hardware witness counters. I used it to stress-test the
µ-ledger’s cost algebra against a known algebraic boundary: the NPA moment matrix
conditions for bounding what correlations are achievable under polynomial constraints.
I did not set out to find what I found. The µ-ledger’s column-contractivity conditions —
three polynomial inequalities that tell the machine when a CHSH correlation is honest
— turn out to exactly characterize the zero-marginal slice of that quantum realizability
boundary. Proved in Coq with zero physics axioms, no quantum mechanics, no
empirical premises. The algebra forced it.
This section builds the CHSH game from scratch so that result makes sense.
14.1 The Bell test setup, from scratch
Imagine two players, Alice and Bob, in separate rooms. They cannot communicate
once the game starts. A referee sends Alice one of two questions (a ∈ {0, 1}). The
referee sends Bob one of two questions (b ∈ {0, 1}). Alice answers x ∈ {0, 1}. Bob

40

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

answers y ∈ {0, 1}.
The game rule: they want x ⊕ y = a ∧ b. The symbol ⊕ is XOR (exclusive OR):
x ⊕ y = 1 when x ̸= y, and 0 when x = y. The symbol ∧ is AND: a ∧ b = 1 only when
both a = 1 and b = 1, otherwise 0. In plain language: their answers should be different
if and only if both questions were 1. For all other question combinations (both 0, or
one each), they should match.
Why 75% is the classical ceiling. Before the game, Alice and Bob can agree on any
deterministic strategy: a function x ( a, λ) for Alice and y(b, λ) for Bob, where λ is any
shared randomness they agree on in advance. Once the game starts, no communication.
Fix any deterministic strategy and freeze λ. Then Alice has two predetermined answers,
x0 and x1 , and Bob has two predetermined answers, y0 and y1 . Winning all four
question combinations would require:

x0 ⊕ y0 = 0,

x0 ⊕ y1 = 0,

x1 ⊕ y0 = 0,

x1 ⊕ y1 = 1.

Now XOR the four left sides. Every variable appears twice, so the total is 0. XOR
the four right sides and the total is 1. That is impossible. So every deterministic local
strategy loses at least one of the four cases, and the best deterministic strategy wins at
most 3 out of 4 question combinations.
Randomized strategies cannot do better: they are just mixtures of deterministic strategies, and averaging strategies that each win 75% at most gives you 75% at most. This
is not a vague claim. It is a direct consequence of linearity of expectation.
So: maximum classical win rate = 3/4 = 75%. Proven by exhaustion in
ClassicalBound.v (zero Admitted): an executable trace using only PNEW, PSPLIT,
and CHSH_TRIAL with µ = 0 achieves exactly this, and MinorConstraints.v
proves no µ = 0 program can exceed it.
14.2 The CHSH inequality: where it comes from
Now here is what took me a while to understand: why is there a specific algebraic
combination S that detects whether correlations can be explained classically?
The key move is this. For any fixed shared randomness λ, Alice’s output A a (λ) ∈
{−1, +1} (I’m using ±1 encoding now, not 0/1) and Bob’s Bb (λ) ∈ {−1, +1}. Consider the expression:

A0 (λ) B0 (λ) + A0 (λ) B1 (λ) + A1 (λ) B0 (λ) − A1 (λ) B1 (λ)
Factor it:

41

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

= A0 (λ)( B0 (λ) + B1 (λ)) + A1 (λ)( B0 (λ) − B1 (λ))
Since B0 and B1 are each ±1, either B0 + B1 = ±2 and B0 − B1 = 0, or B0 + B1 = 0 and
B0 − B1 = ±2. The two terms cannot both be large. In either case, | B0 + B1 | + | B0 −
B1 | = 2, and since | A0 |, | A1 | ≤ 1, the entire expression is at most 2 in absolute value
for any fixed λ.
Average over λ:

S = ⟨ A0 B0 ⟩ + ⟨ A0 B1 ⟩ + ⟨ A1 B0 ⟩ − ⟨ A1 B1 ⟩
where ⟨ A a Bb ⟩ is the correlation (expected value of the product) when questions are
a and b. Since the expression before averaging was bounded by 2 for every λ, the
average satisfies |S| ≤ 2.
That is the argument. The combination with the minus sign is chosen exactly because
the factoring trick works: one of the B-terms goes to zero and the other to ±2, forcing
the whole thing below 2. The inequality |S| ≤ 2 is not a coincidence. It is a pure
algebraic consequence of the outputs being ±1 and being determined locally.
This is proven in Coq in MinorConstraints.v (zero Admitted,
local_box_CHSH_bound). The formal statement: for any factorizable box B,
|S( B)| ≤ 2. ClassicalBound.v proves the complementary result: that |S| = 2 IS
achievable at µ = 0 (a constructive witness showing the bound is tight).
√
14.3 The quantum bound: why 2 2?
√
Quantum mechanics allows |S| to reach 2 2 ≈ 2.828. Why that number?
Starting from zero quantum mechanics:
In quantum mechanics, a particle can be in a superposition of states. For a qubit — the
quantum version of a single bit — the state is a vector α|0⟩ + β|1⟩ where α and β are
complex numbers satisfying |α|2 + | β|2 = 1. You can picture this geometrically: any
valid qubit state sits on the surface of a unit sphere (the Bloch sphere), with |0⟩ at the
north pole and |1⟩ at the south pole.
A measurement on a qubit corresponds to choosing an axis through the sphere. The
measurement returns +1 if the state is on one side of that axis, −1 if it’s on the
other. For a shared two-qubit state (Alice holds one qubit, Bob holds the other), the
correlation between Alice’s answer and Bob’s answer depends on the angle between
their measurement axes. The farther apart the axes, the less correlated the answers.
√
The 2 2 bound comes from optimizing this geometry. Here is the derivation for the
anticommuting optimal configuration.

42

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

For a qubit (a 2-state quantum system), any measurement observable with outcomes
±1 satisfies M2 = I (the identity matrix) — squaring a ±1-valued operator gives the
identity. At the optimal configuration, Alice’s two observables anticommute: Â0 Â1 =
− Â1 Â0 , and Bob’s two observables also anticommute. This is the “90 degrees apart”
condition on the Bloch sphere: Â0 = σx , Â1 = σy , for example. In this anticommuting
configuration, all cross terms in Ŝ2 that involve anticommutators { Âi , Â j } = Âi Â j +
Â j Âi vanish (because anticommuting observables have anticommutator zero), and we
get:

Ŝ2 = 4I ⊗ I − [ Â0 , Â1 ] ⊗ [ B̂0 , B̂1 ]
where [ Â0 , Â1 ] = Â0 Â1 − Â1 Â0 is the commutator. The commutator of two anticommuting ±1 observables has operator norm exactly 2. So ∥[ Â0 , Â1 ]∥ = 2 and
∥[ B̂0 , B̂1 ]∥ = 2, giving ∥[ Â0 , Â1 ] ⊗ [ B̂0 , B̂1 ]∥ = 4. Therefore ∥Ŝ2 ∥ = 4 + 4 = 8 and
√
√
∥Ŝ∥ = 8 = 2 2.
(For non-anticommuting configurations, the cross terms don’t cancel perfectly and
you get a strictly smaller bound. The anticommuting configuration is the only one that
√
saturates 2 2.)
The Coq proof (TsirelsonQuantumModel.v) covers the zero-marginal NPA model
√
specifically, not the full operator-algebra derivation above. Both give |S| ≤ 2 2.
The NPA model here refers to a mathematical framework introduced by Navascués,
Pironio, and Acín in 2007 for bounding quantum correlations. The idea: instead of
directly characterizing what quantum mechanics allows, the NPA hierarchy gives a
sequence of conditions (each tighter than the last) that any quantum correlation must
satisfy. The “zero-marginal” version imposes the specific constraint that marginal
probabilities factor correctly: the probability of Alice’s outcome does not depend on
Bob’s measurement setting and vice versa, which is the no-signaling condition. A
trace is quantum_realizable in this model if its CHSH statistics are consistent with
those NPA-level constraints. This is a sufficient condition for quantum realizability,
not a characterization of all quantum strategies.
TsirelsonUpperBound.v supplies the rational threshold bookkeeping and the algebraic/classical side of the story. I’m not claiming that TsirelsonUpperBound.v
alone proves every possible quantum strategy is bounded. The formal claim is the
named quantum-model theorem, and it has the quantum_realizable premise.
√
The gap between 2 and 2 2 is real. No locally factorizable strategy can bridge it. That
is the signature of the NPA realizability boundary: correlations that cannot be produced
by any shared classical randomness, no matter how much pre-game coordination you
allow. Under the named hypothesis A_QM (that quantum experiments realize the
NPA model), this gap corresponds to the regime accessible only to quantum strategies.

43

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

The algebraic fact holds regardless.
The Inquisitor’s note on the rational approximation. TsirelsonUpperBound.v
names the rational threshold 5657/2000 ≈ 2.8285 for exact rational comparisons. The
√
real-valued quantum-model bridge uses 8 directly. Those are different proof surfaces,
and the manuscript should not blur them.
14.4 What the cost algebra proves
Theorem 14.1 (Classical CHSH Bound). For any locally factorizable correlation (Alice’s
answer depends only on a and shared randomness λ; Bob’s answer depends only on b and λ),
|S| ≤ 2. And |S| = 2 is achievable at µ = 0, so the bound is tight.
Theorem 14.2 (Non-locality of CHSH violation). WitnessCount configurations with S > 2
cannot be produced by any local hidden variable model.
Theorem 14.3 (Tsirelson upper bound for the zero-marginal NPA model). If a trace
is quantum-realizable in the zero-marginal NPA model, then its CHSH value satisfies |S| ≤
√
√
8 = 2 2.
Theorem 14.4 (General algebraic Tsirelson bound). For every algebraically coherent
correlator — one satisfying | Exy | ≤ 1 and four constraints derived from 3 × 3 submatrices of
the NPA moment matrix (“minors” are the determinants of square submatrices; requiring them
to be non-negative is part of the PSD condition), with witness parameters t, s — the CHSH
√
value satisfies S2 ≤ 8, i.e., |S| ≤ 2 2. This is the general case: all algebraically coherent
correlators, not just the symmetric configuration. The Coq proof uses psatz, a tactic that finds
a certificate showing a polynomial inequality holds by constructing an explicit sum-of-squares
decomposition — a way of writing the inequality as a sum of squared polynomial expressions,
which is manifestly non-negative. The rational approximation corollary uses 5657/2000 as
√
an exact rational overestimate of 2 2 (verifiable: (5657/2000)2 = 32001649/4000000 > 8),
allowing the bound to be checked in exact rational arithmetic without floating point. No physics
√
premises. Pure polynomial arithmetic. The Tsirelson bound 2 2 is derived from algebra, not
assumed.
The coupling language version of Bell’s theorem is proved in
CHSHCouplingBridge.v:
a WitnessCount-consistent locally deterministic
strategy (a0, a1, b0, b1) produces a separable coupling — one that maps each setting
to exactly one outcome type. Any locally factorizable morphism coupling satisfying
WCLocallyConsistent has |S| ≤ 2. Contrapositively: S > 2 rules out every locally
factorizable morphism coupling. The no-go is stated in the morphism coupling
language, not just in the statistical layer.
What does this have to do with computation? The connection is through the witness counters and the certification layer. If a Thiele Machine program accumulates
CHSH trial results (via CHSH_TRIAL) and then certifies that S > 2 (via CERTIFY
or LASSERT), the certification is non-free. Certifying binary game statistics requires
paying µ ≥ 1. The statistics themselves (raw CHSH trials) are free. Claiming you
know what they mean is not. This is the witness insight taxonomy (Section 5).
44

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

14.5 The bit-commitment requirement
Obtaining attested cross-correlations above the classical bound requires a disclosure
instruction. Here is why that is a structural fact, not a policy choice.
Each CHSH_TRIAL records setting bits and outcome bits into witness counters.
Those raw counts are free. But certifying what they mean — attesting that the crosscorrelations ⟨ A a Bb ⟩ justify a particular claim — requires explicit certification, and
certification requires an explicit cost.
Proved in RevelationRequirement.v. The structural fact: the only instruction that
can set csr_cert_addr nonzero is MORPH_ASSERT (when the morphism exists
and the property string is non-empty). Any trace that ends with supra_cert must
include a valid MORPH_ASSERT step. The raw data (CHSH_TRIAL counts) is free.
The certified claim about what the data means is not.
14.6 Algebraic characterization of the µ-ledger honesty condition
Here is the stress-test result. I did not design the µ-ledger’s column-contractivity
conditions to match anything from physics. I defined them as the natural polynomial
conditions that make the NPA moment matrix well-formed. The algebra forced the
following.
Positive semidefinite (PSD): A matrix is positive semidefinite if for any vector v you can
feed it, the result v T Mv ≥ 0. That is, the matrix never maps a vector
to something
!
a b
pointing “backwards” relative to the vector. For a 2×2 matrix
, this means a ≥ 0,
b c
c ≥ 0, and ac − b2 ≥ 0 (the diagonal entries are non-negative and the determinant is
non-negative). For larger matrices, it generalizes: every principal submatrix (every
square subblock on the diagonal) must also be PSD. PSD is the mathematical condition
that a matrix can represent genuine inner products, covariances, or correlations in a
quantum state. The NPA framework uses PSD of a specific 5×5 matrix (the “moment
matrix”) as the condition for quantum realizability. You build that 5×5 matrix from
the four CHSH correlators, and if it’s PSD, the correlators are consistent with some
quantum state.
14.6.1 The matrix, written out
Here is the actual 5×5 NPA moment matrix for the zero-marginal CHSH scenario. The
five operators are: I (identity), A0 (Alice’s measurement for setting 0), A1 (Alice’s
measurement for setting 1), B0 (Bob’s for setting 0), B1 (Bob’s for setting 1). The (i, j)
entry is the expected value of Oi · O j . Zero-marginal means we set ⟨ A0 ⟩ = ⟨ A1 ⟩ =
⟨ B0 ⟩ = ⟨ B1 ⟩ = 0 and the cross-correlation terms ⟨ A0 A1 ⟩ = ⟨ B0 B1 ⟩ = 0.

45

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026




1 0
0
0
0


0 1
0 E00 E01 


M=
1 E10 E11 
0 0



0 
0 E00 E10 1
0 E01 E11 0
1
Rows and columns are indexed 0–4 for { I, A0 , A1 , B0 , B1 }. The diagonal is all 1s
because Oi2 = I for ±1-valued observables. The off-diagonal entries Eab are the CHSH
correlators. Everything else is zero because the marginals vanish.
14.6.2 Where the three conditions come from
The three column-contractivity conditions come directly from PSD of this matrix. Here
is the derivation.
2 − E2 ≥ 0
Condition 1: 1 − E00
10

Take the 3×3 submatrix from rows and columns {1, 2, 3} (the A0 , A1 , B0 block):



1
0 E00


1 E10 
 0
E00 E10 1
Compute the determinant by expanding along the first row:
2
2
2
1 · (1 · 1 − E10
) − 0 + E00 · (0 − E00 ) = 1 − E10
− E00

For PSD this determinant must be ≥ 0. That is condition 1.
2 − E2 ≥ 0
Condition 2: 1 − E01
11

Take the 3×3 submatrix from rows and columns {1, 2, 4} (the A0 , A1 , B1 block):



1
0 E01


1 E11 
 0
E01 E11 1
2 − E2 ≥ 0. That is condition 2.
Same calculation: determinant = 1 − E01
11
2 − E2 )(1 − E2 − E2 ) ≥ ( E E + E E )2
Condition 3: (1 − E00
00 01
10 11
10
01
11

This comes from the 4×4 block of rows/columns {1, 2, 3, 4}. A matrix is PSD if and only
if you can write it as a product C T C for some matrix C (the Cholesky decomposition),
or equivalently, its Schur complement is PSD. The Schur complement of the top-left

46

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

2 × 2 identity block is:
S = I2 − C T C,

where C =

S=

A −B
−B C

E00 E01
E10 E11

!

!

2 − E2 , B = E E + E E , C = 1 − E2 − E2 . For S to be PSD:
where A = 1 − E00
00 01
10 11
10
01
11
diagonal entries non-negative (conditions 1 and 2 again) and determinant AC − B2 ≥ 0.
That is condition 3.

That is the complete derivation. Three conditions. Two from 3×3 submatrices. One
from the Schur complement of the 4×4 block. All of it falls out of the single requirement
that M is positive semidefinite.
Why this equals quantum realizability. The forward direction is the derivation
above: if the correlators are column-contractive, the matrix M is PSD by construction. The reverse direction (proved as npa_psd_implies_column_contractive
in coq/kernel/QuantumPartitionPSD.v) is that if M is PSD, the correlators must
be column-contractive. The proof: take any PSD matrix M and feed it the specific vector v = (0, −( E00 y0 + E01 y1 ), −( E10 y0 + E11 y1 ), y0 , y1 ). The PSD condition v T Mv ≥ 0
gives the quadratic form Ay20 − 2By0 y1 + Cy21 ≥ 0 for all real y0 , y1 . A quadratic
ay2 + 2by + c ≥ 0 for all y if and only if ac ≥ b2 (non-negative discriminant). That
closes condition 3. The diagonal conditions come from setting y1 = 0 and y0 = 0
separately.
A correlation ( E00 , E01 , E10 , E11 ) is Thiele-honest if and only if it is zero-marginal NPA
realizable. Exactly. Not approximately. Not “consistent with some physics axiom.”
The biconditional is pure polynomial arithmetic, zero axioms:
Theorem 14.5 (Thiele honesty ⇐⇒ NPA-PSD).
honest(E) ⇐⇒ psd-npa(E)
where honest means the three column-contractivity conditions hold, and psd-npa means the
5 × 5 zero-marginal NPA matrix is positive semidefinite.
The left side is three polynomial inequalities (column contractivity of the zero-marginal
NPA matrix):
2
2
1 − E00
− E10
≥ 0 (condition 1)
2
2
1 − E01
− E11
≥0

AC ≥ B2

(condition 2)

(condition 3)

2 − E2 , B = E E + E E , C = 1 − E2 − E2 . These
where A = 1 − E00
00 01
10 11
10
01
11
are the three conditions of zero_marginal_column_contractive (defined in

47

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

coq/kernel/MuLedgerQuantumBridge.v): column 0 norm ≤ 1, column 1 norm
≤ 1, determinant AC − B2 ≥ 0. The right side says the NPA moment matrix is positive
semidefinite — the standard mathematical characterization of quantum realizability.
The forward direction (zero_marginal_npa_column_contractive_implies_psd
in MuLedgerQuantumBridge.v) was proved first.
The reverse direction is new:
given a PSD NPA matrix, specialize it at the vector
(0, −( E00 y0 + E01 y1 ), −( E10 y0 + E11 y1 ), y0 , y1 ). The PSD condition gives a quadratic-iny0 /y1 that is everywhere non-negative. Then quadratic_nonneg_discriminant
(∀t, a + 2bt + ct2 ≥ 0 ⇒ b2 ≤ ac) closes the determinant condition. The diagonal
conditions come from y0 = 1, y1 = 0 and y0 = 0, y1 = 1. Both directions are packaged
as the biconditional column_contractive_iff_quantum_realizable in
coq/kernel/QuantumPartitionPSD.v.
What this means for the hierarchy of correlations:
• Classical local hidden variables: |S| ≤ 2.
• Thiele-honest = zero-marginal NPA realizable (biconditional, both directions,
√
zero axioms). Every Thiele-honest correlation satisfies |S| ≤ 2 2, but NOT
√
every correlation with |S| ≤ 2 2 is Thiele-honest: (1, 0, 1, 0) has |S| = 2 but fails
condition 1.
• No-signaling: no constraint beyond | Eab | ≤ 1.
2 − E2 =
• PR box (E00 = E01 = E10 = 1, E11 = −1): condition 1 gives 1 − E00
10
1 − 1 − 1 = −1 < 0. Fails immediately by direct arithmetic.

• Tsirelson bound:
state_column_contractive_implies_tsirelson
(coq/kernel/MuLedgerQuantumBridge.v) proves Thiele-honest ⇒ |S|2 ≤
√
8 (i.e., |S| ≤ 2 2) directly from column-contractivity. The chain factors through PSD: column-contractive ⇒ NPA-PSD ⇒ row bounds ⇒
Tsirelson, and the row-bounds step is tsirelson_from_row_bounds in
√
coq/kernel/TsirelsonGeneral.v. The contrapositive (|S| > 2 2 ⇒ not
Thiele-honest) follows immediately. The converse is false and not proved.
A Turing machine can output the correlations (1, 0, 1, 0). These are not Thiele-honest:
condition 1 gives 1 − 12 − 12 = −1 < 0. The arithmetic closes by lra once
column_contractive_iff_quantum_realizable is destructed on condition 1.
The µ-ledger’s column-contractivity conditions are what make the quantum boundary
real for computation: there exist correlations a Turing machine certifies but no Thiele
Machine certifies as honest.
To falsify: exhibit E00 , E01 , E10 , E11 satisfying the three polynomial inequalities but with
a non-PSD NPA matrix. No such example exists; the theorem proves it impossible. Or
exhibit a quantum experiment producing a non-PSD NPA matrix. That would break
quantum mechanics, not this theorem.
48

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

15 Irreversibility Accounting and the µ-Hierarchy
15.1 Historical motivation: Landauer’s irreversibility argument
Rolf Landauer proved in 1961 that erasing one bit of information from a physical
system must release at least kT ln 2 joules of heat into the environment. The µ-ledger’s
irreversibility indicator was inspired by this argument. The formal Coq content
requires none of it.
A bit of information is stored in a physical system with two distinguishable states: call
them 0 and 1. “Erasing” the bit means forcing the system to state 0 regardless of what
it was before. Before erasure, the bit could be 0 or 1; you have no idea which. After
erasure, you know it is 0. You have gone from maximum uncertainty (1 bit of entropy)
to zero uncertainty.
Here is the key physical constraint: entropy — loosely, disorder, or uncertainty — can
only increase in a closed system. That is the second law of thermodynamics. The
universe keeps a running total of disorder, and that total never goes down. Erasing the
bit reduced the bit’s uncertainty by k ln 2 (here k is Boltzmann’s constant, a physical
conversion factor between temperature and energy, approximately 1.38 × 10−23 J/K).
Some other part of the universe must absorb at least that much new uncertainty to
compensate. The cheapest place to dump entropy is as heat into a thermal environment
at temperature T. The heat required to compensate is Q = kT ln 2.
I found this argument important because it is the same kind of argument as No Free
Insight: you cannot get structure for free, and the machine tracks where you paid.
The physical connection (that µ counts correspond to actual thermodynamic entropy)
is a named bridge hypothesis (mu_landauer_unruh_calibrated): it calibrates µ
to physical energy units. That hypothesis is not proven in Coq. The formal theorem
below requires none of it.
15.2 What the Thiele Machine proves
Theorem 15.1 (µ-Landauer Step Bound). For any instruction i, the
irreversible_bits i indicator (a lower-bound estimate of how many bits of irreversible erasure the instruction performs) is bounded by instruction_cost i.
“Conservative” here means the indicator never overcounts the actual irreversibility — it is a
floor, not a ceiling. For a single step, the µ increase is at least irreversible_bits i; for
a trace, total irreversible-bit indicators are bounded by total instruction cost.
This is a theorem about the formal step semantics of the machine. It says the machine’s
cost accounting is Landauer-shaped: every positive-cost irreversible indicator used
by this file is covered by µ. It is deliberately coarse. It is not a microscopic physical
erasure model for every possible hardware transition.
The physical interpretation, that µ costs correspond to actual thermodynamic entropy, is conditional.
It depends on a named hypothesis

49

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

(mu_landauer_unruh_calibrated) that calibrates µ to physical energy units.
That hypothesis is physically motivated and consistent with the formal development,
but it is not proven in Coq. It is a bridge to physics, not a derived fact. I say this
directly because it is true.
The formal content of LandauerDerivation.v is narrower and cleaner: (1) only
CERTIFY sets vm_certified := true, proven by case analysis on every instruction; (2) CERTIFY’s cost is S(δ) ≥ 1 by construction; (3) therefore certification always requires positive µ-cost; (4) total µ-cost bounds the file’s total_irreversible_bits
measure over the trace. irreversible_bits is a conservative indicator function:
it returns 1 for instructions that the file classifies as irreversible (those in the certification/revelation class) and 0 for everything else. The theorem says: the total number of
irreversible-class instruction firings in a trace is bounded by the total µ spent. This is
the formal Landauer-shaped claim: irreversible operations are tracked by µ. It does
not say that irreversible operations in the thermodynamic sense (erasing physical bits)
cost exactly kT ln 2 each. That would require the calibration hypothesis. None of this
requires a physical calibration. Physical calibration would plug in the Boltzmann
constant and the temperature, turning µ counts into joules. That step is the named
bridge hypothesis.
15.3 The µ-hierarchy
The proof:
The µ-cost hierarchy theorem is the time hierarchy theorem analogue for this machine.
It says µ-budget k is necessary and sufficient for level-k certification. The separation is
strict and infinite.
Theorem 15.2 (µ-Hierarchy). For every k ≥ 1:
1. There exists a trace reaching vm_certified = true with µ-cost exactly k.
2. Any trace with vm_mu ≥ k has trace_mu_cost ≥ k.
Corollary 15.3 (mu_hierarchy_no_upper_bound). No fixed µ-budget suffices for all
certification levels.
The point: there is no shortcut. You cannot certify at level k for less than k units of µ.
Paying more gets you more. Paying less is structurally impossible. This is a hierarchy
theorem: each µ-cost level is strictly more powerful than the last, and no level is
achievable for less than its stated price.
The analogy is the time hierarchy theorem from classical complexity theory. That
theorem says: for any time bound T (n), there are problems solvable in time T (n)2
that are not solvable in time T (n). More time buys strictly more computation, and no
amount of cleverness closes the gap. The µ-hierarchy theorem says the same thing
for structural certification cost: more µ buys strictly more certified structure, and no
amount of cleverness reaches level k for less than k units of µ.
50

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

To falsify: find k ≥ 1 and a trace reaching vm_certified = true and vm_mu ≥ k
with total trace cost < k. The theorem says this cannot happen. If it does, the cost
accounting is wrong.

16 Discrete Geometry over Partition Graphs
The partition graph is also a discrete geometric object. Here is one result that falls out,
no physics required.
16.1 Discrete triangulation of the partition graph
Each module in the partition graph carries structural data, and several bridge files use
µ-derived quantities as geometry-like weights. The discrete Gauss-Bonnet file is more
specific than that: it reads the partition graph as a triangulated combinatorial object
and uses an equilateral angle model where every triangle corner contributes π/3. It
does not derive those angles directly from µ costs.
A discrete triangulation defines a curvature-like angle defect. To see why: on a flat
surface, if you draw a triangle, the interior angles sum to 180◦ . On a curved surface,
the angles can sum to more or less than 180◦ . Curvature is the amount by which
triangles deviate from flat. In the equilateral discrete model, curvature at a vertex is
the defect left after subtracting the incident triangle angles from 2π.
The Euler characteristic χ is a number that captures the overall shape of a triangulated
surface, independent of how you draw the triangles. For any triangulation with V
vertices, E edges, and F triangular faces: χ = V − E + F. This is remarkable: no matter
how you triangulate the same surface, you get the same number. For a sphere, χ = 2.
For a torus (donut shape), χ = 0. The continuum Gauss-Bonnet theorem says the total
curvature of a closed surface equals 2πχ: the local geometric information (curvature)
integrates to a global topological fact (shape). That is the theorem I proved in the
discrete setting.
16.2 The discrete Gauss-Bonnet theorem (unconditional)
Theorem 16.1 (Discrete Gauss-Bonnet). For any well_formed_triangulated partition graph g in the equilateral angle model,
angle_defect( g) = 5π · χ( g)
This is a fully proven theorem about the discrete triangulation model used here. It is
not the continuum Gauss-Bonnet theorem and it is not a derivation of angles from µ
cost. It is a combinatorics result: any well-formed triangulated partition graph satisfies
the angle-defect formula. That is the full extent of the geometry section.

51

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

17 What Coq is, and why I used it
Coq is a proof assistant. It is a programming language where the type system is so
expressive that you can write proofs as programs and have the compiler check whether
they are valid.
Here is the idea. In a normal programming language, a type says something about
what kind of value a variable holds. In Python, x: int means x is an integer. In
Coq, types are propositions. The type n > 0 means “the proof that n is positive.” A
function from n > 0 to n + 1 > 0 is a proof that if n is positive, n + 1 is too.
The compiler checks whether the types line up. If your proof has a hole and you write
“trust me,” the compiler rejects it. There is no way to convince the compiler of a false
theorem by being persuasive or authoritative. The only way through is to actually
prove it.
I used Coq because I don’t trust informal arguments. Including my own. I spent
months being convinced by my own reasoning that various claims were true, only to
find when I tried to write the Coq proof that some key step was wrong. The machine
caught it. That is the point.
17.1 The Inquisitor
Beyond Coq’s type checker, the project has a custom proof auditor called the Inquisitor
(scripts/inquisitor.py). It runs on every commit and emits 84 distinct rule
codes (see the Rules section of the generated INQUISITOR_REPORT.md). The main
categories:
• No holes. No Admitted, admit, or give_up anywhere in the active proof files.
No unproved Axiom or Parameter declarations in project code.
• No vacuous theorems. No theorem whose conclusion is literally True, 0 = 0,
or any other tautology that proves nothing. No “theorem” of the form P →
P. No existence claims backed by constant witnesses. Coq’s kernel already
prevents circularly dependent proofs (it checks definitional well-foundedness);
the Inquisitor catches separately the case where a proof is technically valid but
epistemically empty — proving True by trivial, for instance.
• No physics stubs. No physics quantity defined as a constant placeholder. No
physics claim without a corresponding invariance condition. No theorem stated
about a physics concept if that concept is not genuinely formalized.
• No trivial true proofs. If a theorem’s entire proof is trivial or tauto and the
conclusion reduces to True, the theorem is rejected.
• Scope enforcement. Kernel files (Tier 1) may not import exploratory files. Theorem connectivity: every file must reach the cost or semantics foundation through
its import chain.

52

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

• Comment hygiene. No TODO/FIXME/WIP markers in active proof comments.
Current Inquisitor status: zero HIGH/MEDIUM/LOW findings across all 205 Coq
files in the active tree.

18 Zero Admitted: what it actually means
“Zero Admitted” means: every theorem in the proof tree was derived without any
gaps. No step was asserted without a derivation. The machine verified the complete
chain.
This is what it does NOT mean:
• It does not mean the theorems prove physical reality. The theorems prove things
about the Thiele Machine model, which is a formal object in Coq. Whether the
model correctly describes physical reality is a separate empirical question.
• It does not mean the Coq axioms themselves are consistent. Coq is built on a
formal foundation called the Calculus of Inductive Constructions. The key idea
underlying it is the Curry-Howard correspondence: proofs and programs are the
same thing. A proof that P is true is literally a program of type P. Checking the
proof is the same as type-checking the program. The “inductive” part means you
can define your own recursive types — natural numbers, lists, trees — inside the
system instead of having them as magical primitives. This matters because it
makes the foundation explicit and auditable.
Now here is the honest limitation. We believe this foundation is logically consistent — that you cannot derive a contradiction from it — but this has not
been proven within Coq itself. That is not a weakness in Coq specifically; it is a
fundamental theorem by Kurt Gödel from 1931. Gödel proved that any formal
system powerful enough to do arithmetic cannot prove its own consistency from
within itself. If it could, it would be contradictory. So Coq’s foundation is trusted,
not proved-from-within, which is the honest state of affairs for any powerful
formal system. The Coq community has studied the foundation extensively and
found no inconsistencies. But “zero Admitted” means every theorem follows
from those axioms. It does not mean those axioms are themselves in-system
guaranteed.
• It does not mean the hardware implements exactly the Coq semantics in all cases.
All 46 opcodes have Qed bisimulation proofs (36 unconditional, 10 under structural invariants coupling_wf and morph_table_wf that hold inductively
from hardware reset, zero structural gaps); documented in RTLGapRegistry.v
and CloseoutVerification.v.
• It does not mean the OCaml runner binary is proven inside Coq to be bitwise
identical to the Coq semantics. OCamlExtractionBridge.v proves Coq-side
observable facts and the parity suite checks the extracted binary empirically.
53

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

The kernel tier (Section 7) is the strongest tier. The theorems listed there have zero
Admitted and zero named hypotheses. They are machine-checked derivations from
the Coq type theory axioms and the Thiele Machine definitions. Nothing else.
The bridge tier involves named hypotheses and documented trust boundaries: the
BSC compiler trust boundary for hardware, the A_QM physical assumption for the
quantum connection, and the external OCaml parity boundary. These are explicitly
labeled and auditable. They are not Admitted proofs. They are documented limits of
the formal claim.

19 How to break this
Every claim in this document has a falsification condition. Here are the main ones.
Falsify No Free Insight.
Find a Thiele Machine program trace that:
• starts with vm_certified = false and vm_mu = 0
• ends with vm_certified = true
• ends with vm_mu = 0
If you find such a trace, the Coq proof of certification_requires_positive_mu
is wrong and the compilation will fail when you add the counterexample as a theorem.
Falsify µ-monotonicity.
Find a state s and instruction i such that (vm_apply s i ).µ < s.µ. The Coq proof of
vm_apply_mu will fail.
Falsify categorical separation.
Prove that for ALL states s1 , s2 with identical classical shadow, ALL instructions
produce the same error behavior. This would contradict categorical_separation
in Coq, meaning the proof has an error.
Falsify Turing strictness.
Prove that every Thiele program can be simulated by a classical program
with the same observable behavior (registers, memory, µ) without ever
touching the partition graph or morphism map.
This would contradict
D5_thiele_strictly_extends_classical.
Falsify structural entitlement.
Find two Thiele states with the same classical shadow where no probe can distinguish
their structural fields. That would contradict shadow_strictly_lossy. Or produce
a strict feasible-set subset with a distinguishing observation that does not yield stronger
membership predicates; that would contradict the feasible-subset theorem.
54

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

Falsify universal certification cost.
Build a CertificationSystem satisfying the one-step rule cs_cert_costs, then
give a trace from uncertified to certified with total cost 0. That would contradict
universal_nfi_any_substrate. If you instead drop the one-step rule, you have
found a free-certification system, not a counterexample.
Falsify the classical CHSH bound.
Exhibit a locally factorizable strategy that achieves |S| > 2. This would contradict
chsh_stat_violation_not_local and also violate known mathematics.
The Inquisitor standard.
Run python scripts/inquisitor.py on the repository.
If it finds any
HIGH/MEDIUM/LOW finding, the proof hygiene has degraded. Current status:
zero findings. If that changes, it is a bug.

20 The full claim ledger
These are the kernel-tier claims (machine-checked, no named hypotheses):
1. no_free_certification: csr_cert_addr going 0 → nonzero in one step requires cost ≥ 1.
2. no_free_certification_mu: same, with µ increment ≥ 1.
3. no_free_certification_trace_mu: trace-level version.
4. no_free_certification_certified: vm_certified going false→true requires cost ≥ 1.
5. certification_requires_positive_mu: both channels covered.
6. universal_nfi_any_substrate: any abstract certification system satisfying the one-step cost
rule has trace-level non-free certification.
7. thiele_universal_nfi_cert_addr: universal theorem instantiated for Thiele’s
csr_cert_addr channel.
8. thiele_universal_nfi_certified: universal theorem instantiated for Thiele’s vm_certified
channel.
9. thiele_represents_simulating_cert_system: any certification system with a simulation
morphism into Thiele transfers certification into a Thiele certified execution.
10. forget_kernel_is_eq_on_classical: the classical snapshot quotient forgets exactly the
non-classical fields.
11. blindness_non_injective: distinct Thiele states can have the same classical snapshot.
12. certification_is_lost: certification can be in the kernel of the classical forgetful map.
13. shadow_strictly_lossy: the classical shadow forgets morphism structure.
14. mu_ledger_necessity: no strict-classical oracle on (mem, regs, pc) recovers the pair
(µ, certified).
15. vm_mu_not_classically_determined / vm_certified_not_classically_determined: neither ledger
balance nor certification status is a function of strict classical state.
16. mu_ledger_mutual_independence: µ and vm_certified are each independent of strict

55

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

classical state and of each other under cost-only/cert-only projections.
17. mu_ledger_minimality / P_full_is_minimal_complete_extension: the full
(mem, regs, pc, µ, certified) projection is complete, and dropping either µ or
certification destroys the corresponding completeness.
18. thiele_nfi_pc_indexed: PC-indexed execution version.
19. mu_is_initial_monotone: µ is the unique canonical cost measure.
20. vm_apply_mu: exact ledger identity (vm_apply s i ).µ = s.µ + instruction_cost(i ).
The cost is not just δ — it is δ for ordinary instructions, S(δ) for cert-setters,
|payload|bits + S(δ) for EMIT, etc.
21. kernel_certified_implies_positive_mu: from zero, reaching certified implies µ > 0.
22. feasible_strict_subset_implies_strict_predicates: feasible-set narrowing plus a
distinguishing observation yields a strictly stronger predicate.
23. strengthening_requires_structure_addition: certified predicate strengthening requires a
structure-addition event.
24. b4_information_reduction_derives_strict_predicates: feasible-set reduction can generate the
strict-predicate premise used by NoFI.
25. info_priced_cert_executions_bound: executed cert-setting events are bounded by ∆µ.
26. observation_partition_reduction_implies_posterior_representative_reduction: observation
classes package into the posterior-representative witness for structural entitlement.
27. info_priced_arbitrary_feasible_reduction_bound: with a decision-tree/representative
witness, feasible-set compression is bounded by ∆µ.
28. info_priced_weighted_feasible_reduction_bound: the ∆µ lower bound extends to
nat-weighted feasible sets.
29. structural_entitlement_representation: strict narrowing plus distinguishability, certified
posterior admissibility, and an explicit posterior-representative reduction imply a
strictly stronger predicate, a structure-addition event, and a ∆µ lower bound.
30. every_sound_structural_shortcut_lands_here: every packaged
SoundStructuralShortcut instantiates the structural-entitlement representation
theorem.
31. categorical_separation: classical-identical states distinguishable by morphism probe.
32. classical_observer_cannot_separate: no classical function separates morphism-distinct
states.
33. shadow_proj / shadow_separation_theorem: formal surjection, strictly lossy.
34. D2_faithfulness: classical programs embedded faithfully in Thiele.
35. D3_conservativity: classical programs leave structural layer untouched.
36. D4_strictness: there exist Thiele steps that escape the classical fragment.
37. D5_thiele_strictly_extends_classical: Thiele strictly exceeds classical semantics.
38. degenerate_projection_theorem: shadow projection is the classical equivalence quotient.
39. no_classical_certification_decider: no classical machine can decide morphism-certification.
40. chsh_stat_violation_not_local: CHSH-violating statistics are non-local.

56

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

41. structural_trace_preserves_cert_addr: traces with no cert-address setter preserve
csr_cert_addr.
42. partition_refinement_nonfree: certified partition knowledge cannot be free.
43. partition_free_but_certification_nonfree: partition structure can be built at δ = 0, but
certified partition knowledge cannot be acquired for free.
44. witness_insight_nonfree_general: certified non-local witness insight requires µ ≥ 1.
45. witness_insight_complete_taxonomy: full three-tier taxonomy proven.
46. separable_coupling / non_separable_coupling: Functional (separable) and non-functional
(non-separable) coupling predicates with concrete witnesses (CategoryLaws.v).
47. CHSH coupling bridge (CHSHCouplingBridge.v): Bell’s theorem in morphism
coupling language. A locally consistent strategy produces a separable coupling and has
|S| ≤ 2. S > 2 rules out every locally factorizable morphism coupling.
48. graph_certify_morphism_lookup: morphism certification cost utility, including lookup
correctness.
49. exists_covering_tree: for any feasible-set reduction, a covering complete binary tree exists
constructively.
50. info_priced_reduction_no_tree_hypothesis: entropy bound without requiring the tree as an
explicit input.
51. sound_shortcut_from_components: assembly lemma for SoundStructuralShortcut from its
component witnesses.
52. in_muP / in_muNP / classical_in_muP: µ-complexity class definitions and basic inclusion.
53. column_contractive_iff_quantum_realizable (coq/kernel/QuantumPartitionPSD.v):
Thiele honesty ⇐⇒ zero-marginal NPA realizability. A zero-axiom biconditional.
Forward (zero_marginal_npa_column_contractive_implies_psd in
MuLedgerQuantumBridge.v): column-contractive NPA PSD. Reverse
(npa_psd_implies_column_contractive in QuantumPartitionPSD.v): NPA
PSD column-contractive, proved by vector specialization plus the
quadratic_nonneg_discriminant lemma from ConstructivePSD.v.
Zero-marginal NPA realizability is the orthogonal-observables slice of the quantum
elliptope (ρ AA = ρ BB = 0), not the full elliptope. Classical correlations like (1, 0, 1, 0)
have |S| ≤ 2 but fail column contractivity — the classical polytope and the
Thiele-honest set intersect but neither contains the other.





54. state_column_contractive_implies_tsirelson
(coq/kernel/MuLedgerQuantumBridge.v): Thiele-honest ⇒ |S|2 ≤ 8, i.e.,
√
|S| ≤ 2 2. The proof factors through quantum realizability:
state_column_contractive_implies_quantum_gram composes with
quantum_realizable_implies_tsirelson_bound (in the same file). The
row-bounds lemma tsirelson_from_row_bounds in
coq/kernel/TsirelsonGeneral.v is the algebraic Cauchy–Schwarz step inside
√
this chain. The contrapositive (|S| > 2 2 ⇒ not Thiele-honest) follows immediately.
√
The converse (|S| ≤ 2 2 ⇒ Thiele-honest) is false and is not claimed.
55. Concrete falsifications by direct arithmetic. The PR box (E00 = E01 = E10 = 1, E11 = −1)
2 − E2 = 1 − 1 − 1 = −1 < 0. Any
fails the first column-contractivity condition: 1 − E00
10
√
super-quantum value |S| > 2 2 falls outside the Thiele-honest set by the contrapositive
57

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

of state_column_contractive_implies_tsirelson. The Turing-classical
correlation (1, 0, 1, 0) also fails condition 1. None of these require new theorem
statements; they are immediate by lra once the biconditional is destructed.
56. mu_hierarchy_theorem (MuHierarchyTheorem.v): for every k ≥ 1, there exists a
certified trace with cost exactly k, and every certified trace with vm_mu ≥ k has cost ≥ k.
Infinite strict µ-complexity separation.
57. mu_hierarchy_no_upper_bound: no fixed µ-budget suffices for all levels.
58. Structural-invariant Qed group (coq/kami_hw/RTLGapRegistry.v,
coq/kami_hw/EmbedStep.v, coq/kernel/GraphReconstructionBridge.v):
the 10 opcodes PNEW, PSPLIT, PMERGE, MORPH, MORPH_ID, MORPH_DELETE,
MORPH_ASSERT, MORPH_GET, COMPOSE, MORPH_TENSOR carry Qed
bisimulation proofs under the inductive invariant coupling_wf (=
coupling_desc_bounded ∧ coupling_pairs_in_range ∧
coupling_pairs_fully_populated) and morph_table_wf. The preservation
theorems coupling_wf_kami_step_preserved and
morph_table_wf_kami_step_preserved show these invariants hold inductively
at hardware reset and through every kami_step operation, so the precondition is
discharged in practice for any state reachable by machine execution.
59. RTL trust boundary (coq/kernel/VerilogRTLCorrespondence.v): the Section
Variable rtl_step_correct states that the synthesised RTL implements the Kami
step function. It is backed empirically by the cosim suite
(tests/test_verilog_cosim.py, 38 tests including
test_all_46_opcodes_in_cosim which checks coverage of every opcode) and the
parametrized cross-layer fuzz suite (tests/test_fuzz_random_programs.py,
tests/test_cross_layer_adversarial_fuzz.py).
coq/kami_hw/VerilogSemantics.v proves rtl_step_correct for the
COQKAMI model and names bsc_kami_compilation_trusted as the residual
trust boundary covering the BSC compiler / pretty-printer pipeline.

Bridge-tier claims (machine-checked, with named hypotheses or documented trust
boundaries):
• Hardware bisimulation: 46/46 opcodes with Qed proofs (36 unconditional + 10 under structural invariants coupling_wf / morph_table_wf,
0 structural gaps); documented in RTLGapRegistry.v (rtl_gap_count
= 0 and rtl_coverage_partition witnessing 36 + 10 + 0 = 46) and
CloseoutVerification.v.
• OCaml extraction: ocaml_bisimulation_closure proves NoFI, µmonotonicity, and totality for the Coq-side extracted observable. The external
OCaml binary equivalence is a parity-test trust boundary, not a kernel theorem.
• Structural advantage: StructuralAdvantage.v proves exact µ costs and the
arithmetic time-tax facts for the factored-search witness; executable tests check
the measured VM behavior.
• Cost formula forcing: cost_necessity + cost_uniqueness, conditional
58

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

on Landauer-Unruh calibration for physical interpretation.

21 What I don’t know
Here is what I don’t know.
Physical interpretation of µ. Whether the µ ledger actually corresponds to thermodynamic entropy in a physical Thiele Machine is an open empirical question. The formal
development is consistent with Landauer’s principle. I think it does. I cannot prove it.
Full
informal
representation
theorem
for
structural
entitlement.
I’ve
proved
structural_entitlement_representation
and
every_sound_structural_shortcut_lands_here.
For the explicit witness class, structural entitlement becomes strict predicate strengthening, requires
structure addition, and carries a ∆µ lower bound. I have not proven the open
translation theorem: whether every human informal story about symmetry, factorization, modularity, independence, or decomposition can always be packaged
as a SoundStructuralShortcut. That is the next theorem layer. It is also the
methodological demand: if an argument can be pushed down into explicit witnesses,
then it has to be pushed to bedrock; if it can still be pushed, it has to be pushed again.
Complexity implications. The classical complexity classes P and NP are defined by
time cost: P is problems solvable in polynomial time; NP is problems where a solution
can be verified in polynomial time even if finding it is hard. The Thiele Machine has
a structural-cost analog: µP is the class of problems solvable with polynomial µ-cost;
µNP is the class where a certified solution can be verified with polynomial µ-cost.
These are formally defined in MuComplexity.v with basic inclusions proved — every
µP problem is in µNP. Proving that µP ̸= µNP, or finding a concrete problem in µNP
that provably requires more than polynomial µ to solve, is hard research and doesn’t
follow from the current definitions. The factored-search witness shows a concrete
structural advantage from paying µ = 18, but that is a single example, not a class
separation.
Shannon-style lower bound. Claude Shannon proved in 1948 that you need
at least log2 n binary questions to identify one item from a set of n items.
That is the information-theoretic lower bound on search. Anything that compresses a set of n possibilities to a smaller set must gather at least that
much information. The Thiele Machine analog: any feasible-set reduction (narrowing Ω to Ω′ ) requires at least log2↑ |Ω/|Ω′ | bits worth of certified structural work. MuShannonBridge.v proves that for any feasible-set reduction, a
covering decision tree EXISTS constructively (exists_covering_tree). The
info_priced_reduction_no_tree_hypothesis theorem proves the entropy
bound without requiring the tree as an explicit input — the tree is chosen automatically
from the reduction sizes. The remaining open step: derive the realization condition
(decision_tree_realized_by_trace) from arbitrary VM trace behavior without
59

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

requiring the user to verify the leaf count explicitly. The naive single-trace claim is
false in general and the file records that explicitly.
Quantum mechanics connection.
The mathematical equivalence between
Thiele honesty and zero-marginal NPA realizability is now a kerneltier
theorem
(column_contractive_iff_quantum_realizable
in
coq/kernel/QuantumPartitionPSD.v, zero axioms).
The zero-marginal
NPA framework is the orthogonal-observables slice (ρ AA = ρ BB = 0) — a proper
subset of the full quantum elliptope. Whether this restriction maps to a physically
privileged class of experiments, and whether a physical Thiele Machine can produce
CHSH-violating statistics by exploiting quantum entanglement in hardware, are open
empirical questions outside the scope of this project.
I could pretend these are answered. I could wave at them vaguely and say “future
work.” I don’t know. These are real open questions.

22 Conclusion
That’s the whole thing.
A Turing machine is blind to global structure. It can compute anything but it has
no internal account of when a computation becomes entitled to use a decomposition,
invariant, morphism, or narrowed feasible set. The Thiele Machine makes that entitlement visible, first-class, and cost-bearing. No Free Insight is the first conservation
law: you cannot certify stronger claims than you started with without paying in a
monotone ledger µ that records every structural commitment.
The proof story is stronger than a one-line ledger rule. Classical shadows are manyto-one quotients that lose entitlement-relevant structure. Strict feasible-set narrowing can be turned into strictly stronger predicates. Certified strengthening requires
structure addition. Any abstract certification system satisfying the one-step cost
rule has trace-level non-free certification. And the structural-entitlement representation theorem welds the explicit witness case together: narrowing, distinguishability, certification, structure addition, and the ∆µ lower bound. Every packaged
SoundStructuralShortcut lands in that theorem. That is the formal spine of the
project.
The machine has 46 opcodes. Most of them are ordinary compute operations that
carry zero structural cost. The mandatory positive-cost certification/revelation class
is LASSERT, LJOIN, EMIT, REVEAL, READ_PORT, CERTIFY, and MORPH_ASSERT.
Partition and morphism-building operations can construct structure at δ = 0; the paid
step is the checked assertion or certification that lets the trace claim it. That is the point
of No Free Insight.
The categorical morphism layer is strictly richer than any classical equivalent. Two
programs with identical registers, memory, µ, and error flag can differ in morphism
60

The Thiele Machine

Devon Thiele • April 2026

structure, and no classical observer can see that difference. The Coq proof checks it.
The hardware design implements all 46 opcodes in RTL. All 46 have
formal bisimulation proofs — Coq proofs that the hardware step function matches the Coq spec step-for-step (zero Admitted).
The official
partition is 36 + 10 + 0 = 46 (theorem rtl_coverage_partition in
coq/kami_hw/RTLGapRegistry.v).
36 are unconditional Qed: 30 from
the SupportedOpcode group plus CALL, RET, CHSH_TRIAL, TENSOR_SET,
TENSOR_GET, LASSERT (the last six handled in EmbedStep_WF.v and
GraphReconstructionBridge.v). The remaining 10 (PNEW, PSPLIT, PMERGE,
MORPH, MORPH_ID, MORPH_DELETE, MORPH_ASSERT, MORPH_GET, COMPOSE, MORPH_TENSOR) carry Qed proofs under the joint structural invariant
morph_table_wf ∧ coupling_wf ∧ coupling_desc_safe. Each component is
preserved by every kami_step: morph_table_wf_kami_step_preserved,
coupling_desc_safe_kami_step_preserved,
and
coupling_wf_kami_step_preserved (the latter takes coupling_desc_safe
as a side hypothesis, which is why the conjunction is the actual inductive invariant).
The gap registry is empty (rtl_gap_count = 0).
The Landauer connection and the CHSH/Tsirelson result are real: one motivates the
cost schedule, one is a pure algebraic theorem. Neither requires physical claims.
Thiele honesty is exactly zero-marginal NPA realizability. That biconditional is zeroaxiom, zero-physics, pure polynomial arithmetic. The zero-marginal NPA framework
is the orthogonal-observables slice of the quantum elliptope; the qualification is documented in coq/kernel/QuantumPartitionPSD.v and is not a gap — it is a precise
scope statement. The µ-cost hierarchy is an infinite strict separation. Every level costs
what it costs, and no level can be reached for less. These are kernel-tier results that
I didn’t plan for and did not expect. The machine told me. Zero Inquisitor findings.
Every claim has a falsification condition. If this is wrong, it will fail visibly, and that is
exactly how it should be.
I built this. Read the proofs.

61

